# 03 Mar 2019

## webgl

Two basic concepts: meshes and shaders.
A mesh combines triangles to create 3d shapes.
Each corner of the triangle is given attributes like position and color.
Meshes are created and updated on the CPU - these computations don't run on the
GPU.
Meshes are sent to the GPU to be rendered.
Shaders turn meshes into pictures.
Shaders run on the GPU.

Rendering pipeline:

Mesh is transformed by two types of shaders:
- Vertex shader: mesh is made up of a bunch of triangles. Each corner is called
a vertex. Vertex shader transforms the attributes of each vertex, modifying 
things like position and color.
- Fragment shader (a.k.a pixel shader): filters applied to individual pixels. 
This is how you work with lighting effects, blur, edge-detection, etc.

Three types of data:

- Uniform: global, read-only variables defined on the CPU
- Attribute: data attached to a vertex
- Varying: variables that can be written to by a vertex shader and are passed to
a fragment shader, where they are read-only.

Performance considerations:

- Computation run on the CPU is expensive because the CPU runs things sequentially.
- The GPU runs computations in parallel.
- Transferring data from the CPU to the GPU is expensive.
  - transfer all vertices at once
  - update mesh on GPU by passing uniform variables

GLSL

Shaders are written using a language called GLSL.

Steps:

1. Render a WebGL element
1. Create a PNG sprite sheet and convert it to a data uri
1. Load the sprite sheet as a texture into the Elm app
