# 10 June 2019

Some things I learned today.
Let-expressions destructure to immediately-invoked anonymous functions.
In Lisp:

```lisp
(define (foo x)
  (let (y (+ x x))
  (+ x y)))
```

desugars to

```lisp
(define (foo x)
  ((lambda (y) (+ x y))
  (+ x x)))
```

Variables defined in a let expression are really parameters of an anonymous
function.
The values bound to a variable in a let expression are really arguments to that
function, which is wrapped around the expression for which those bindings are
in scope.

This is how a syntax that looks like a statement can be used in a language like
Haskell, Elm, PureScript, and Lisp where everything is an expression.

```haskell
foo :: Integer -> Integer
foo x =
  let
    y = x + x
  in x + y
```

desugars to

```haskell
foo :: Integer -> Integer
foo x = (\y -> x + y) (x + x)
```

## The difference between let and where in Haskell

There are some subtle differences between `let` and `where` in Haskell.
Only `let` is an expression.
And `let` can be written anywhere an expression can be written.
But `where` is a syntax construct, which limits the way it can be used.

In these examples, `let` and `where` are equivalent:

```haskell
foo :: Int -> (Int, Int)
foo x = (x, y)
  where y = x * x
```

```haskell
foo :: Int -> (Int, Int)
foo x =
  let y = x * x
  in (x, y)
```

But this use of `where` does not compile:

```haskell
foo :: Int -> (Int, Int)
foo = \x -> (x, y)
  where y = x * x
```

`x` is not in the scope of the `where` clause.

This does work:

```haskell
foo :: Int -> (Int, Int)
foo = \x ->
  let y = x * x
  in (x, y)
```

This is also why a `let` expression can be used in the middle of a do block.
But exactly how does that desugar?
Not sure I understand that one 100%.

`where` blocks have their own advantages.
A `where` block can be used to share bindings between parts of a function that
are not expressions.

```haskell
f :: Int -> Int
f x
  | foo a = a
  | bar a = f a
  | otherwise = g a
  where a = baz x
```

The where `a` binding in the where block is shared with a part of a function
that is not an expression.
A guard is not an expression, it's a syntactic construct.
A let expression would have to be on the right side of the assignment operator.

```haskell
f :: Int -> Int
f x =
  let a = baz x
  in case () where
    | foo a = a
    | bar a = f a
    | otherwise = g a
```

So let is less readable in this context.

### Lambda lifting

The lifting pattern is the practice of taking locally defined functions and
"lifting" them into a higher context where they a more reusable.

Lambda lifting is a technique used when the function to be lifted has a free
variable, that is a variable that is a function parameter.
For example, `issqrt'` contains the free variable `n`.

```haskell
isqrt :: Integer -> Integer
isqrt n
  | n < 0 = error "issqrt"
  | otherwise = isqrt' ((n + 1) `div` 2)
  where
    isqrt' s
      | s * s <= n && n < (s + 1) * (s + 1) = s
      | otherwise = isqrt' ((s + (n `div` s)) `div` 2)
```

So the solution is to add a parameter `n` to `isqrt'`.

```haskell
isqrt' n s
  | s * s <= n && n < (s + 1) * (s + 1) = s
  | otherwise = isqrt' ((s + (n `div` s)) `div` 2)

isqrt :: Integer -> Integer
isqrt n
  | n < 0 = error "issqrt"
  | otherwise = isqrt' n ((n + 1) `div` 2)
```

## Main ideas of SICP Chapter 1

1. How are expressions evaluated?
  - The substitution method.
1. How many steps does a process take?
  - The complexity of a process.
  - How is the number of steps connected to the definition of the procedure?
1. How are procedures used to create abstraction?
  - Functions as input
  - Functions as output

The core idea might be functions.

1. How is a function created?
1. How is a function evaluated?
1. How many steps does it take to evaluate a function?
1. How is the number of steps determined by the definition of the procedure?
1. How are functions used to create abstraction?
