# 22 January 2019

Examples of compiling to JavaScript:

- [elm/compiler](https://github.com/elm/compiler/blob/a6568a63f3ffc4defdb608d180b23a0113a89342/compiler/src/Generate/JavaScript/Builder.hs)
- [purescript/purescript](https://github.com/purescript/purescript/blob/master/src/Language/PureScript/CodeGen/JS.hs)

## Re-using state/environment in a REPL loop

I want to preserve the REPL environment after each loop.
I'm using the ReaderT monad to model the environment.
How does this work?
I start with a default environment.
Whenever there is a call to `define`, I use `local` to update the environment.
`local` runs an action in a modified environment.
The modified environment is separate from the original environment.
Whatever follows the action does not have access to the modified environment.
This is how I do lexical scope.

```scheme
(begin
  (define foo 1)
  (define bar 2)
  (define baz
    (lambda (x)
      ((define y 3) (+ x y)))))
```

What's confusing to me is how I can update the same scope more than once.
Calling `local` makes sense when the environment is modified for everything under
that branch of the AST.
But in the above example, I modify on the first branch (`define foo...`), and
the modified environment is also available on the two other sibling branches.
Why?

- [Elm REPL](https://github.com/elm/compiler/blob/master/terminal/src/Repl.hs)

## How does Elm's REPL work?

On a high level, the REPL works by compiling the Elm code to JavaScript, writing
the JavaScript to a file, running the file with Node, and then reporting the
result.

Questions

- Is the state used by the REPL the same as the state used by the compiler?
- I guess the compiler has no state because it's not an interpreter.
- That's actually an interesting point - there's a difference between a REPL for
  a compiled and interpreted language.
- But does the compiler maintain any kind of environment? How is `define` 
  implemented for a compiled language?

## How I made it work

1. There is a `run` function and a `loop` function.
1. `run` calls `loop`.
1. `loop` is recursive.
1. `loop` takes the interpreter environment.
1. `run` calls `loop` with the default environment.
1. `loop` waits for input.
1. `loop` calls `evalStrInEnv`, passing it the environment and the input.
1. `evalStrInEnv` returns a tuple of the evaluated code and the modified 
environment.
1. The type of `evalStrInEnv` is `IO (L.EnvCtx, L.LispVal)`
1. `loop` is wrapped in `safeExec`
1. `safeExec` is `IO a -> IO (Either String a)`
1. so, `safeExec` here is `IO (L.LispVal, L.EnvCtx) -> IO (Either String (L.LispVal, L.EnvCtx))`
1. `safeExec` catches errors and converts them to strings.
1. `safeExec` takes an action and returns the result of the action or the error 
string in an Either.
1. `loop` pattern matches on the Either.
1. If it's `Left`, then print the error message and loop again.
1. If it's `Right`, then print the result and loop again with the modified 
environment.
1. `InputT IO ()`

This works ok. 
I wonder how other Repls preserve thread the environment through loops.
I don't think there's anything equivalent here in the Elm REPL because it 
"interprets" the Elm code by compiling it to a JS file, running it with Node,
and piping the result to STDOUT.
It looks like Carp's REPL does something similar: compile to C and then execute
the C code.
I think what I saw in Carp is that they keep concatenating the input string onto
the last input strings, and then recompiling everything.
So there isn't a stateful environment, it's just built from scratch every time.
I could very easily be mistaken.

The problem I have now is that I replaced ReaderT with StateT, and ReaderT was 
enabling lexically scoped variables.
`Reader.local` was used to define function-scoped variables without polluting the
global environment.
I replaced `local` with `put`, but I think that means that all calls to `let` 
pollute the global environment.
But I haven't been able to confirm this.
I'm getting variable not found errors when I try to use let.
