# 11 Jul 2019

## Lisp stepper

I have two problems at the moment:

1. my Lisp evaluator crashes with a stack overflow when I call it
1. `evalWithHistory` returns a `Attr f a` where `a` is `Eval E.Expr`.
  The Eval must be run in order to get the `Identity (Either EvalErr E.Expr)` 
  result.

### Problem 1: stack overflow

This is the error:

```
RangeError: Maximum call stack size exceeded
    at new SFrm (/home/maxhallinan/Projects/l-lang/.psci_modules/node_modules/Expr/index.js:86:18)
    at /home/maxhallinan/Projects/l-lang/.psci_modules/node_modules/Expr/index.js:211:20
    at /home/maxhallinan/Projects/l-lang/.psci_modules/node_modules/Data.Traversable/index.js:207:114
    at /home/maxhallinan/Projects/l-lang/.psci_modules/node_modules/Data.Traversable/index.js:207:66
    at /home/maxhallinan/Projects/l-lang/.psci_modules/node_modules/Data.Traversable/index.js:207:66
    at /home/maxhallinan/Projects/l-lang/.psci_modules/node_modules/Data.Traversable/index.js:207:66
    at /home/maxhallinan/Projects/l-lang/.psci_modules/node_modules/Data.Traversable/index.js:207:66
    at /home/maxhallinan/Projects/l-lang/.psci_modules/node_modules/Data.Traversable/index.js:207:66
    at /home/maxhallinan/Projects/l-lang/.psci_modules/node_modules/Data.Traversable/index.js:207:66
    at /home/maxhallinan/Projects/l-lang/.psci_modules/node_modules/Data.Traversable/index.js:207:66
```

I've narrowed it down to the invocation of `cataM` in `eval`.

```purescript
eval :: E.Expr -> Eval E.Expr
eval = cataM evalAlg
```

I think that's it's the call to traverse in `cataM`.
I'm not sure how to debug this.

`evalWithHistory` uses the `histo` recursion scheme instead of `cataM`.
This does not throw a stack overflow.
The `CVAlgebra` re-uses a lot of the core evaluation logic.
And even when I just have `evalAlg` throw an `EvalErr` or call `eval` on an 
empty list, I still get the stack overflow.

Possible next steps:

- Look at some other Lisp evaluators implemented in PureScript
- Ask on the functional programming slack
- Try replacing my homebrew recursion schemes with the Matryoshka library

### Problem 2: unevaluated result

I can successfully generate a `Attr (Compose E.ExprAnnF E.ExprF) (Eval E.Expr)`.
The problem is that I want 
`Attr (Compose E.ExprAnnF E.ExprF) (Identity (Either EvalErr E.Expr))`.
This requires me to go through the entire tree again, running the monad at each
point in the tree.

Problems:

- How do I thread the state through? Can each instance of `Eval` can't be run in 
  isolation? As you evaluate each subexpression, you build up more and more 
  state, with further subexpressions depend on. So I'd need to get the order of
  this right.

Possible next steps:

- Write a function that will do this.

## Discouraged and frustrated

I thought this idea to build a Lisp stepper would be relatively easy.
I'm now around 40 hours into this project, over 4 weeks.
I'm losing motivation.

Things that are frustrating me:

- PureScript's compiler errors make me feel like an idiot.
  It's rarely ever clear from the error what the problem is.
  The errors read like the compiler talking to itself.
  No attempt is even made to clean up type parameters. 
  When the compiler marks `t` as `t4`, and then tells me about a problem with
  `t4`, I have no idea what it's talking about.
  Fixing type errors is often a painstaking process of fidling around with 
  typed holes in an attempt to get more information.
  I don't remember experiencing this frustrating with Haskell before.
- This whole project has made me question my ability to use a typed functional
  language. I've spent so much time trying to get the code to compile and it 
  doesn't feel like I've spent much time on the problem I'm trying to solve.
- Is this project even worth the time I've spent on it? I can't tell and I'm 
  starting to doubt it. I thought it would be a fun way to spend a week but 
  after many more hours, without the end in sight, I am starting to doubt it.
- I devote a lot of time to programming and it often feels like I have very 
  little to show for it.
  Why don't more people subscribe to my blog?
  Why don't I have a popular open source project?
- I don't know what problems people want to solve. I have a hard time thinking
  up projects to work on.
- I think I shouldn't give up on Haskell just yet. Maybe this is just a more 
  challenging project than I realized. I'm am also interested in implementing an
  ActivityPub server and understanding decentralized and p2p web protocols more.
  Maybe I should try my hand at that in Haskell and see how I like it.
- That would also give me experience with server development and SQL.
