# 13 Jul 2019

## Lisp stepper problem: functions return their s-expression body unevaluated

The problem is calling a function just returns the function body:

```lisp
(= id (fn (x) x))
(id (quote foo))
; x
```

`x` is bound to `foo` correctly.

What are the steps for evaluating a function?

1. I call `evalLst` on `(id (quote foo))`, for example. Write that as `(e1 e2)`.
2. I get the attribute of `e1`. So `e1` is already evaluated.
3. I check that `e1` is `Fn env params body`.
4. If it isn't `Fn...`, then I throw an error.
5. If it is `Fn localEnv params body`: 
  1. Merge the global and local env.
  2. Update the new env with param/arg bindings
  3. Map over `EvalT` and `ExceptT`, setting the new local env as the new state.

This is another problem with bottom-up traversal.
What I need to happen at this point is for the body to get evaluated.
But the body has already been evaluated because the traversal visited the body
expression before it visited the function expression.

When do I visit the body node?
I don't want to bind the function's parameters until the function is applied.
But I evaluate the body node when the function is defined.

## How I learn Haskell

- Seek out confusion
    - Confusion is where learning starts
- Write out what you understand and don't understand
- Don't just poke around
- Compiler errors aren't always clear
- Don't expect yourself to understand 
- Reading long type signatures can take some work - that's ok
- Make generic type signatures concrete
- It's ok if you don't understand a type signature at a glance
- Be patient
- Write the evaluation by hand / on paper
- Use typed holes to get more information
- Ask for help
- Build things
- Get yourself into a corner

