# 09 February 2019

What I like

- static types, hindley-milner style
- ml-style syntax
- case expressions
- tagged union types

Interesting bit of syntax idea for an ML language:

```
tag Foo = Foo | Bar | Baz
```

## Runtime error messages for Guston

Questions:

- is it possible to show the source code in the error message?
  - what do I need to do this?
  - what is a good error message?
- what is a good parsing error message?
- what is a good error message?
    - file
    - line and column number
    - shows me the context of the error
        - prints the source code and points to the location where the error
          occurred
    - for NumArgs, show the expression that failed to evaluate, e.g. `(quote x y)`
- runtime error messages that read like elm's compiler messages
- goal: runtime error messages that are as detailed and helpful as elm's compiler messages
- need to figure out how to a stack and stacktraces work
- might be neat for the error messages to show the evaluation steps in the way that
  The Little Schemer does

Problems I need to solve:

- My unit tests broke when I switched eval and parse from Sexpr to Expr
  - I need a new way to write these tests. 
  - Writing them by hand using the internal data types like Expr and EvalErr is
    too tedious and time consuming.
  - The parser tests test whether parse and parseFile convert strings to an AST
  - The eval tests test whether eval correctly evaluate an AST
  - Approaches:
    1. just add dummy info to the Expr type and only check that the sexpr is correct
      - still tedious
    2. just test end to end, lisp string inputs and lisp string outputs
      - lose granular information
- How to show stack traces
  - Right now, the Eval state is just env. 
    I need to create a more complex evaluation state that is a record with env 
    and the stack.
  - When a new value is generated during evaluation, like through cons, what is
    the "location" of that value?
    If every Expr has a location, and Eval is a recursive function of Eval, then
    I need to give new Expr a location.
    Example:
    ```
    (cons (quote x) (quote (y z)))
    -- the result of (quote y) should have the location of the Lst sexpr: Expr (Lst  [Expr SFrm Quote _, Expr Sym "y" _]) _
    -- same with (quote (y z))
    -- (x y z) should have the location of the list containing cons
    -- (cons (quote x) (quote (y z)))
    -- (cons (quote x) (quote (y z)))
    -- here's a runtime error (cons (quote (x y)) (quote (y z)))
    -- The function cons expected an atom as its first argument but received (x y) instead
    -- Here are the steps:
    -- (car (cons (quote (x y)) (quote (y z))))
    -- (cons (quote (x y)) (quote (y z)))
    -- (cons (x y) (quote (y z)))
    --       ^ 
    --       Found the error here
    -- wrong type: expected an atom 
    -- in the expression (quote (x y))
    -- in the expression (cons (quote (x y)) (quote (y z)))
    -- in the expression (car (cons (quote x) (quote (y z))))
    -- in (cons (quote x) (quote (y z)))
    ```

```
---- WRONG TYPE ------------------------------------------------------ src/foo.g
1:5:
   |
 1 | (car (cons (quote (x y)) (quote (y z))))
   |            ^
The function cons expected an atom as its first argument but received (x y) instead.
Here are the last 4 steps I took:

(car (cons (quote (x y)) (quote (y z))))

(cons (quote (x y)) (quote (y z)))

(quote (x y))

(cons (x y) (quote (y z)))
      ^ 
      I found the error here
```

Is something like this possible?
A few problems I see:

- The stack could be huge.
- How do I know where to stop when I'm printing out the stack trace?
- The mistake could be far from the error. Is this an inevitable problem with 
  dynamic languages?
- How many of these errors would go away with a static type system?
- Is it possible to print the source code and the steps for evaluating the 
  source code?
- How do I keep the location info correct when I'm evaluating?

Next steps

- Fix the tests 
- Figure out how to pass position info around during evaluation
- Do some research about callstacks and stack traces
- MVP: print out the stack trace to last n steps for each error
