# 11 June 2019

## An Introduction to Recursion Schemes

Codata: defining recursive data using the fixed points of functors.

```haskell
data ExprF a
  = Index a a
  | Call a [a]
  | Unary String a
  | Binary a String a
  | Paren a
  | Literal Lit
  deriving (Show, Eq, Functor)

data Term f = In { out :: f (Term f) }

type Expr' = Term ExprF

bottomUp :: Functor a => (Term a -> Term a) -> Term a -> Term a
bottomUp fn =
  out                     -- unpack the term to access the children
  >>> fmap (bottomUp fn)  -- traverse each child of the unpacked term
  >>> In                  -- repack the term
  >>> fn                  -- apply apply f to it

-- take an expression from 1 + (2 + (3 + 4)) to 1 + 2 + 3 + 4
flattenTerm :: Expr' -> Expr'
flattenTerm (In (Paren x)) = x
flattenTerm other = other

flatten'' :: Expr' -> Expr'
flatten'' = bottomUp flattenTerm

-- bottomUp fn = out >>> fmap (bottomUp fn) >>> In >>> fn
topDown fn = In <<< fmap (topDown f) <<< out >>> fn
```

## Expressions and evaluation

Things you could do:

1. sorting
1. filtering

This is an expression.

```lisp
> brick
brick
```

This is also an expression.

```lisp
> (list brick)
(brick)
```

Expressions have values.
To find the value of an expression, you have to evaluate it.

```lisp
(list (list (list brick)))
(list (list ball (brick)))
(list shoe (ball (brick)))
(shoe (ball (brick)))

(first (shoe (ball (brick))))
shoe

(rest (shoe (ball (brick))))
(ball (brick))

(rest (rest (shoe (ball (brick)))))
(rest (ball (brick)))
(brick)
```

Expressions are evaluated in steps.

```lisp
(define main brick)

(define main ball)

(define main something)

(steps (list (list (brick))))
```

```lisp
(list black white gray)

(list brick ball something)
(list brick ball (list brick ball something))

(first (list brick ball something))
brick

(rest (list brick ball something))
(ball something)

(define main '(ball something))

(define main )

(assign main (if true brick ball))

```lisp
(assign main (if false brick ball))
(list (list 1))
(list (1))
((1))
(list (list (list )))

```

```lisp
(assign identity (fn (x) x))
```

1. see how an expression evaluates, see the substitution method
1. see how the process grows (some kind of tree structure?)
1. see abstraction
1. something that can be visualized
1. something that can be sorted
1. something simple

1. shoe, brick, ball, ladder, book
these aren't sortable
1. colored squares? white gray black
1. are colors kind of boring?

1. objects like shoe, brick, ball, ladder, book
1. colored squares: red, green, yellow, orange, purple, pink
1. shades like white, gray, black
1. enable the reader to create their own thing?
1. shapes like circle, triangle, square, rectangle, diamond, rhombus
1. noises? something with sounds instead
1. letters? characters are sortable, they have an order, but maybe a little
boring to look at
1. what do children's books use to show order? numbers, seasons, alphabet, they
have these alphabet books where they associate an image with each letter of the
alphabet to make the alphabet more interesting. for example, you could use
animals. or objects from the house.
1. how many objects do i want? not more than 12. maybe 5? i want enough objects
that the coder remember what they are doing.
1. maybe it is a mistake to be planning this whole thing out. maybe i should just
jump in, prototype a lisp with atoms and lists.
i can easily restrict that lisp later.
1. i want to get to prototyping the stepper.
1. and i need ideas for how to describe/show the idea of different definitions
taking more or less time.
1. i have to see if that's possible to do without numbers.
1. the whole intution for the taking more steps is the idea of trees. some
trees are deeper than others. need to see how people visualize trees.
1. just get a small lisp going to prototype the stepper.
1. is a scrubber good for times when you have hundreds of steps? maybe not.
1. i wonder what a good interface for that is. but can deal with that later.
1. it's how the tree grows and shrinks over time. that's the space thing
1. how deep the tree gets is the space thing. how many branches the tree has is the
time thing.
1. how to fully show this?
