# 1 Apr 2019

## A DSL for my blog

I have a couple of bigger ideas here, pulled from specific pain points:

- The structure of a blog post for presentation/publishing is not necessarily
  the most convenient structure for editing:
    - I think that the footnotes should live closer to the context they refer to
      for authoring, but for reading, they should be subordinate to the body of
      the text.
- I keep wanting my blog post to have layers. To be several documents that are
  layered on top of each other like pieces of paper.
  And you can cut holes in the layers, which is how you see through the top 
  layers to layers underneath.
    - One example of this is code snippets. As it works now, the code snippet
      is just part of the prose layer of the document.
      But I want to think of all the code snippets together as a second, 
      underlying document, a code document.
      Then I can cut holes in the prose document to create views into the 
      underlying code document.
    - I think footnotes or annotations are another kind of layer.
      Actually, I like this more than writing the footnotes inline with the prose
      context.
      There should be a document for annotations and a way to link between these
      documents.

There are two considerations here.
A DSL would have to faciliate composition of these layers.
Simply put, the DSL would need to indicate where the holes are and what layer 
is exposed by that hole.
One could imagine that any layer can have holes, so there's a kind of recursive
flattening of these holes into a document.

Second, the DSL has to faciliate markup.
In authoring mode, you just want to be using a semantic markup. You don't want
to be wrapped up in presentation or structure, because it breaks the flow of 
writing.
But when the document is ready to be published, you want to give the semantic
elements a presentation and structure.

Need an authoring layer and a composition layer.
Nothing feels very natural yet.

```
:::doc
Software is built to solve problems for the user.
But every user's problem is a little different from every other.
What software solves is often an average of those different problems. ::link[notes 1]
When the user is not average, they must shoehorn their problem into the
software's solution. 

::fragment[code 12 120]
:::

:::notes
::id[1] This is a footnote.
:::

:::code
foo :: Int -> Bool
foo 0 = False
foo _ = True
:::
```

Need:

- Syntax highlighting
- Ability to author code snippets in a separate file and then specify the lines
  that the should be pulled from the file for the snippet.
- Ability to specify ranges of a code snippet that should have focus highlighting
- Show diffs in a code snippet
- An easier way to do footnotes
    - automatic numbering and anchor link generation
    - write footnotes closer to the context they refer to.
      have them automatically pulled out and organized together
- Easier way to add classes to the markup in a post body
- Easier way to create blockquotes that have a cite tag

What about Pollen?

```
::h1
  Say what you mean

::p
  Hello world!
  This is a paragraph.
  That is a paragraph.
  ::note
    This is text for a footnote.
  This is another paragraph.
```
