# 07 Aug 2019

Tags: LeetCode

**Todo**

- [X] LeetCode exercises
- [X] Review interactive notebooks

**Questions**

- What language do I want to use for my Logo interactive notebook?
- [X] What features do I want to have for my Logo interactive notebook?
- How much time should I spend on LeetCode every day?
- How to get the most practice out of LeetCode?
- Should I try out ClojureScript?
- Should I give up on my Lisp stepper?

## Interactive notebooks

Interactive notebooks are based around cells.
The document is a collection of cells.
Cells can contain text or code.
Text cells are just static text, maybe supporting Markdown or some other markup
format.
Code cells support a programming language.
You can run the code cells and see their result.

### Minimal definition of an interactive notebook

**Version 0.1.0**

Language v0.1.0:

- Atoms
- Lists
- Functions
- Special forms
  - `cons`
  - `define`
  - `first`
  - `if`
  - `is-atom`
  - `is-equal`
  - `lambda`
  - `quote`
  - `rest`

Notebook v0.1.0:

- Two types of cells:
  - Prose
  - Code
- Prose cell
  - The default cell type
  - Supports Markdown
  - Markdown is rendered as you type
- Code cell
  - Two parts:
    - Code
    - Result
  - Can be evaluated
  - One expression per cell
  - Hitting enter after the expression puts you in a new code cell
- Save document to local storage

**Version 0.2.0**

Language v0.2.0

- Turtle graphics API

Notebook v0.2.0

- Turtle graphics display

### maria.cloud

**Links**

- [YouTube: Maria: a beginner-friendly coding environment for Clojure](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=CUBHrS4ZzO4)
- [Functional Geometry summary by Frank Buss](http://www.frank-buss.de/lisp/functional.html)
- [A Functional Geometry Julia notebook](http://shashi.biz/ijulia-notebooks/funcgeo/)
- Functional Geometry by Peter Henderson, 1982
- [When I Sit Down At My Editor, I Feel Relaxed](http://px16.matt.is/)
- [A visual perception account of programming languages: finding the natural science in the art](https://hal.inria.fr/hal-00737414/document)
- [Scheme Bricks](http://www.pawfal.org/dave/index.cgi?Projects/Scheme%20Bricks)
- [What Is a Computational Essay](https://blog.stephenwolfram.com/2017/11/what-is-a-computational-essay/) by Stephan Wolfram

Two types of blocks: code blocks and prose blocks.

#### Prose blocks

When you start typing in the notebook, you are typing in a prose block.
You can use Markdown in the prose block.
Markdown is rendered as HTML while you type.

#### Code blocks

To create a code block, click enter twice in the prose block.
This adds a white block, where you can enter text.
Each code block is limited to one expression.
If you hit enter at the end of an expression (to the right of the last closing
parentheses), a second code block is added to the document.
You're immediately focused in that code block so you can keep on typing.
To run the code, you click Ctrl-Enter.
The result of evaluating the expression is displayed in the gutter to the right
of the code block.

Ideas I like:

- One expression per cell.
- Separate prose and code cells.
- Insert a code cell by hitting enter twice.
- Hitting enter after the last closing parens puts you in a new code block. 
  Extremely convenient.
- Key bindings for all commands.
- All of the text editing features:
  - Slurp/barf
  - Text selection
  - Drag to move a selection
- Select and evaluate a sub-expression - really like this idea.
- Errors don't crash the entire document.
- Command palette and organizing commands according to a taxonomy
- The built-in `what-is` form that will return a description of the value.
    - This is really nice for beginners.
- When you evaluate a function value, the result is logged as `f`. You can 
  expand `f` to see the implementation.
- Documents are serialized as Clojure files where the prose cells are comments

Ideas I'm unsure about

- Have to focus on the code block and then hit Ctrl-Enter to evaluate
  - Why not have the code evaluated automatically when you focus off the code
    block?
- Showing the evaluated result in the gutter instead of in the body of the prose
- That cells by default aren't reactive - you have to explicitly create a 
  reactive cell. I think reactivity should be the default. Should all cells 
  share the same environment?

**Some code block features**

### Observable.hq

UX:

- A new document starts out with 1 cell
- The cell is prefilled with a call to the Markdown tagged template literal to 
  set the title of the document
- A cell has two halves:
  - The bottom half (with a gray background) is where you write the code
  - The upper half is where you see the result of evaluating the cell
- The bottom half has a play button that is used to run the code
- There is a plus button beneath each cell which enables you to insert a new 
  cell at that point in the sequence
- Cell actions:
  - Edit
  - Comment
  - Delete
  - Reorder
  - Import a cell from another notebook
  - Pin: a pinned cell is one where the code is visible

Features I like:

- Can import cells from other notebooks
- All cells represent a single value (I think I like this, it makes it easier to 
  reason about and it doesn't seem too hard to create more and more cells).
- Can comment on cells
- Readers can edit cells
- Can rearrange cells
- Cells do not have to be ordered in any particular way - seem to be lazily 
  evaluated.

**Links**

- [Observable: An Earthquake Globe in Ten Minutes](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=uEmDwflQ3xE)
- [Observable: Five Minute Introduction](https://observablehq.com/@observablehq/five-minute-introduction)
- [Observable: Introduction to Notebooks](https://observablehq.com/@observablehq/introduction-to-notebooks)

> An Observable notebook is a sequence of cells.
>
> https://observablehq.com/@observablehq/five-minute-introduction

Notebook is a sequence of cells.
Each cell is JavaScript.

User actions on cells: 

- Edit
- Comment
- Delete

Each cell can only have one value.

This is a valid cell:

```
foo = 1
```

This is not a valid cell:

```
foo = 1
bar = 2
```

But you can use blocks to add multiple expression/statements to a cell:

```
foo = {
  const bleep = 1;
  return 2;
}
```

Everything inside the block has to be JavaScript.

These assignments are JavaScript variable assignments.
The variable name is a way to name the cell.
Then the value can be referenced in other cells.
(Wouldn't it just be easier for all the cells to share the same environment?)

Here are two cells:

```
foo = 1
```
and

```
bar = foo + 1
```

When the value of `foo` is changed, then `bar` is automatically updated.

Cells can generate DOM or use a built-in `html` tagged template literal.
There is also a Markdown (`md`) tagged template literal.
The DOM fragments are reactive if they refer to other cells.
Asynchronous stuff can be done using a Promise.

```
asyncCellValue = new Promise((resolve) => {
  const foo = asyncAction().then(foo => resolve(foo));
})
```

Cells that refer to async cells will be updated when the Promise is resolved.
There's no need to distinguish between synchronous and asynchronous cells.

You can use `require` to load a library into a cell.
Cells also functions as generator functions - the cell context is a generator
context.
So you can `yield` from a cell.
The cell yields a value up to 60 times a second.
Any cell referring to a generator cell sees the current value of the generator.

Observable notebooks use three main primitives:

- Promises
- Generators
- DOM

The `viewof` operator will expose the current value of an input element.
**Can import cells from other notebooks.**

## Reverse an array of characters in-place

Must have O(1) space complexity.
Modify the input array in-place.

First solution:

```javascript
const reverseString = (s) => {
  const z = s.length / 2;

  for (let i = 0; i < s.length; i++) {
    if (i < z) {
      const x = x[i];
      x[i] = x[s.length - 1 - i];
    }
  }
};
```

Got this in about 35 minutes.

Approach:

- switch the corresponding elements (first and last, second and second-to-last, 
  etc.)
- only switch while the loop index is less than half the length of the array.

The second bit feels like a kludge.
There must be a nicer way to do this.

Actually, this seems to be the way that people are doing it, basically.
There are few messy things here.

Improvements:

- Instead of checking that `i < s.length / 2`, just limit the loop to 
  `s.length / 2`.

```javascript
const reverseString = (s) => {
  // cache this expression
  // if written inline in the for-loop, it will be recomputed for each iteration
  const x = s.length / 2;

  for (let i = 0; i < x; i++) {
    const temp = s[i];
    s[i] = s[s.length - 1 - i];
    s[s.length - 1 - i] = temp;
  }
};
```

This has O(1) space complexity and O(n) time complexity.

One thing I noticed when running this through LeetCode is that the execution 
time is faster if I add an `if` statement to the loop body:

```javascript
const reverseString = (s) => {
  // cache this expression
  // if written inline in the for-loop, it will be recomputed for each iteration
  const x = s.length / 2;

  for (let i = 0; i < x; i++) {
    if (i < x) {
      const temp = s[i];
      s[i] = s[s.length - 1 - i];
      s[s.length - 1 - i] = temp;
    }
  }
};
```

LeetCode says that this version is faster than 10% more of the solutions.
I expected the conditional to slow it down.

## Remove duplicates from sorted array in-place

Must have O(1) space complexity.
Modify the input array in-place.

Solution:

```javascript
const removeDuplicates = (nums) => {
  for (let i = 0; i < nums.length; i++) {
    for (let j = i + 1; j < nums.length; j++) {
      if (nums[i] === nums[j]) {
        nums.splice(i,1);
        i = i - 1;
        j = j - 1;
      }
    }
  }

  return nums.length;
};
```

Space complexity: O(1)
Time complexity: O(n^2)

This took me 35 minutes to completed.

LeetCode's solution:

```javascript
const removeDuplicates = (nums) => {
  if (nums.length === 0) {
    return 0;
  }

  let i = 0;

  for (let j = 1; j < nums.length; j++) {
    if (nums[i] !== nums[j]) {
      i++;
      nums[i] = nums[j];
    }
  }

  return nums.length;
};
```

How does this work?

- Check when two adjacent elements aren't equal. (this is different from my
  approach which was to check when there were two duplicate elements).
- When two elements aren't equal:
  - Advance the counter `i` by one.
  - Move `nums[j]` to `nums[i]`.

```
[1, 1, 2]

// i === 0, j === 1
// nums[i] === 1
// nums[j] === 1
// i === 0, j === 2
// nums[i] === 1
// nums[i] === 2
// i === 1
// nums[1] = 2
```
