# 15 Aug 2019

## ProseMirror

ProseMirror is a set of tools and concepts for building rich text editors.
The calling code gets full control over the document.
The document is represented as a data structure, not an HTML blob.
All updates go through single point.
At that point, you can apply transformations to the update.

- `prosemirror-model`: defines the editor's document model. The model is the 
  data structure describing the content of the editor.
- `prosemirror-state`: the data structure that describes the editor's entire 
  state, including the selection, and a transaction system for moving from one
  state to the next.
- `prosemirror-view`: implements a user-interface component that shows a given 
  editor state as an editable element in the browser, and handles user 
  interaction with that element.
- `prosemirror-transform`: modify documents in a way that can be recorded and 
  replayed. 

### Transactions

When a user types into the editable element, state transactions occur.
A transaction describes the changes that are made to the state.
These changes can be applied to a new state, and the new state can be used to 
update the view.
Plugins hook into transactions.

Here is a simple plugin that logs the new size of a document:

```javascript
let state = EditorState.create({schema});
let view = new EditorView(document.body, {
  state,
  dispatchTransaction(transaction) {
    console.log(
      'Document went from ', 
      transaction.before.content.size, 
      'to ', 
      transaction.doc.content.size);
    let newState = view.state.apply(transaction);
    view.updateState(newState);
  }
});
```

All state updates go through `updateState`.


### Plugins

Plugins extend the behavior of the editor and the editor state.

- `keymap`: a plugin that binds actions to keyboard input
- `history`: makes it possible to undo/redo changes to the document

Plugins are registered when you create the state.

```javascript
import {history, redo, undo} from 'prosemirror-history';
import {keymap} from 'prosemirror-keymap';

let state = EditorState.create({
  schema,
  plugins: [
    history(),
    keymap({"Mod-z": undo, "Mod-y": redo,})
  ],
});
```

### Commands

`undo` and `redo` are "commands".
A command is a function that implements an editing action.
An editing action is performed by the user by typing or interacting with the 
editor's UI.

The interface for a command function: take an `EditorState` and a 
`EditorView.dispatch` function, and return a boolean.

```javascript
function cmd(state, dispatch) {
  //...
  return true;
}
```

### Content

A state's document lives under the `doc` property.
`doc` is a read-only data structure.
A state can be initialized with a `doc`.
If you want to prefill the editor, you must parse the prefill string into a doc,
using the doc schema.

### Documents

Documents are a datastructure defined by ProseMirror.
A document is a node that holds a fragment containing zero or more child nodes.
A document is a tree of block nodes.
Most leaf nodes are text nodes.

Inline content in a document is not stored in a tree structure (unlike the DOM).
Instead, it's stored as a sequence.
Markup (like `em` or `strong`), is metadata rather than node.
This model makes it easier to represent inline positions and operate on inline
text (not having to deal with a tree structure).

Node object properties:

- `isBlock`: is a block node
- `isInline`: is an inline node
- `inlineContent`: true for block nodes that expect inline content
- `isTextblock`: true for block nodes with inline content
- `isLeaf`: doesn't expect any child nodes

## Why I'm not using TypeScript and not PureScript or Elm for logo-notebook

- PureScript doesn't have enough support for WebGL. 
  I want to use WebGL for turtle graphics.
  There are a few older libraries that wrapped WebGL but they are unmaintained.
  It might be interesting to write a WebGL library in PureScript at some point,
  but I don't want to force myself into that position.
- PureScript UI libraries are slower than other options, like Elm and React.
- I did some prototyping in Elm. I got fairly far but then realized that I need
  access to things like the `selectionStart` and `selectionEnd` props to build
  the text editor interactions I want.
  Elm is so locked down that there is no escape hatch here, no way to get that
  property.
- In general with Elm, I always have a fear that sometime in the future, there
  will be something I want to do that I can't do.
  There is also a fear that a new version of the language will remove something
  I rely on.
  And I don't like the culture.
- TypeScript is statically typed, so hopefully I'll have the same confidence to
  refactor code that I get from working with Elm, PureScript, and Haskell.
- I'm also curious about ClojureScript, but I want to make progress on this 
  project rather than learn a new language.

## create-react-app with TypeScript

To use create-react-app with TypeScript, run:

```bash
npx create-react-app my-app --typescript
```

## TypeScript project configuration

What is `tsconfig.json`: 

- Placed in the root directory of a TypeScript project
- Specifies root files
- Specifies compiler options

The TypeScript compiler depends on `tsconfig.json`:

- `tsc` invoked with no input files looks up the file tree for a `tsconfig.json`
- `tsc --project <location of tsconfig.json>` compiles project at location

`tsconfig.json` tells the compiler what files to compile.

You can do this with an array of file names:

```json
{
  "files": [
    "foo.ts",
    "bar.ts",
  ]
}
```

or you can do this with the `include` and `exclude` fields:

```json
{
  "include": [
    "src/**/*"
  ],
  "exclude": [
    "node_modules",
    "**/*.spec.ts"
  ]
}
```

The compiler will default to compiling all files in the directory with a `.ts`
extension.
