# 03 Jul 2019

## Review: All for Nothing (Alles umsonst) by Walter Kempowski

A German household is preoccupied with life at home while the German occupation 
of East Prussia deteriorates around them.
Family heirlooms are lost, stolen, and destroyed.
People flee and die or disappear.
The waves of war gradually erode the shoreline of their peacetime lives.
Finally, there is little left of the way it was and those who would remember it 
that way.

The sadness of this book 

There are no dependable heroes and villains in this book. 
Many characters are by turn hero and villain.
People act not out of good or evil, but out of an instinct for 
self-preservation.
And yet so few succeed.

Even the fanatacism of the Nazi party official is rooted 
Even the fanatical Nazi party official became a Nazi because 
his grocery store 
went bankrupt.
The Nazi party rescued him from financial ruin.


There are just a collection of people acting out of self-preservation.
Even the fanatical Nazi party official, it is revealed, became a Nazi when his
grocery store went out of business.
The Nazi party was the only institution that lifted him out of financial ruin.
Every character acts out of self-preservation, that is all there is.
And yet so few succeed in preserving themselves.

And yet, of all the people in this book, it is those in this household who kept 
on pursuing and preserving the lives they had lived in peacetime who it seems 
were doing anything worthwhile.
The characters engaged in war and politics seem absurd an pointless.
The rest seems absurd and pointless.
What is all for nothing is that this war 

_All for Nothing_ makes plain the moral collapse of German society in the 1940s.
And it makes plain what was lost 
This story is filled with sadness for what Germany lost when it went down this 
path.
The "All" in _All for Nothing_ is the 

A German household in East Prussia
ignores the advance of the Red Army, intent
on living life

_All for Nothing_ is the story of a German household that intent on ignoring the

with living life in spite of the war unfolding around them.

is the story of a German household in 1945 East Prussia
_All for Nothing_ is the story of a German household that is quietly preoccupied
with living life in spite of the war un

All for Nothing is the story of a German household that is quietly preoccupied
with living life in spite of the war unfolding around them.
During the fall of Germany to the Russians at the end of World War II.
A mother, her son, a few attendants, and a collection of guests that turn up at
the Georgenhof.
What I liked most about this book was the way things gradually fell apart.
Quietly, gradually, things end, things are destroyed, things are lost, people die,
until there is nothing left of the way things were.
There are no good guys and bad guys.
Everyone is compromised someone, even the boy Peter, spends a lot of the book
lying about what he has experienced.
But there are no bad guys either.
I liked how that works.
I liked how there was noone that was good or bad.
I liked that there was always humor.
I liked that there was no sentimentality.
I liked that the book ends almost abruptly, without finality, with uncertainty.
I like that you never really see the advancing Germans.
What else?
I like that the stuff in the stuff is the stuff.
