# 12 Mar 2019

## Working on maxhallinan/face-invaders

time: 3 tomatoes

accomplished:

- refactored the collision detection logic
- wrote tests for the collision detection logic
- fixed a bug in the bullet-hit-count logic that was hidden by previously
  incorrect collision detection

Fred Brooks, in The Design of Design, has been talking about how you have to
find the design through the work.
One can't just sit down, design the thing, and then build it.
You have to go through cycles of designing and building before you know what
you're doing, what problem you're trying to solve, and how to solve it.
This is really true.
This is a lesson I've had to learn.
This is something that has really frustrated me in the past.
I think part of the reason I was frustrated is that I was afraid to change my
code.
Changing JavaScript code is such a slog.
Inevitably, something breaks.
It's like trying to tiptoe past a sleeping dragon, except that no matter how
softly you walk, the dragon always wakes up.
I would always come to resent the people that were sending my on walks past this
sleeping dragon.
But this doesn't change the nature of the design process.
You can't expect the design not to change after you've built something.
That's just how it goes - the design will change as people learn more about the
problem by interacting with what you've built.
So, I need tools that make it easier for me to iterate quickly and safely.
There are two kinds of tools that I've discovered over the years that make the
iteration process easier: automated tests and static type systems.
Both of these seem like they are essential to comfortable iteration.

I struggle with writing tests.
I have to force myself to write tests.
It's not that writing tests is very hard.
But I find that I have to write a lot of code just to add one test.
Mocking data can be very tedious, especially when the data is complex.
Mocking complex states can be very hard.
I've found that one thing which makes life easier is writing helper functions.
The helper functions should abstract everything except the inputs specific to
the test.
This also clarifies the test itself.
So if I have a function that takes a large record, but I only want to
test the output of that function for three states of a single field on that
record, then I write something like `expectFoo State1`. `expectFoo` mocks all
the data except the value of the field and it returns an `Expectation`.
So the body of the test is just `expectFoo State1` or `expectFoo State2`, and so
on for each of the states that I'm testing.
Then it's much easier to write a bunch of tests quickly.
So I think first, write helper functions that give me a nice interface to what
I'm trying to test.
Then use those helper functions to write the tests.
I wonder if there is a simpler/easier way to think about testing functions with
complex inputs.
