# 09 Mar 2019

## Miscellaneous

**Miscellaneous links**

- [The Frank-Ratchye Studio for Creative Inquiry](http://studioforcreativeinquiry.org/)
- [Future Programming Workshop](http://www.future-programming.org/2015/index.html)
- [Coda](https://coda.io/welcome)
- [Lisp Editing in the 80s - Interlisp SEdit](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=2qsmF8HHskg)

### Software as an abstraction over language

Design software first as a domain-specific language.
Then build the software on top of the language.
The software itself should be de-composable to the underlying language, and 
users should be able to use the language to extend the software or make the 
software do what they want.

A lot of the software I've worked on is tools tailored to specific problems.
The problem is that everyone's problem is a little different.
So you try to shoehorn each of these different problems into a general solution.
I saw this a lot in the way clients used the BSD Tools.
We'd often get a request for something that the Tools wasn't meant to do and 
we'd have to hack a work around.
This has been my own experience working with desktop software.
It's only easy to use and useful when what you are doing has been anticipated
by the people who designed the software.

What if software was just always some kind of interactive document and a 
domain-specific language that you use in the document.
The document is a programming environment for the DSL.
So what the user gets is not a package of ready-made solutions but a platform 
that makes it easier for them to solve their own problems.
The user writes their own software.
Then the job of the programmer is to build DSLs and environments for the DSL that
are easy for a layperson to use.
Could this be successful?

### Language

It would be interesting to look at picture books and early readers that 
introduce readers to language.
How is natural language introduced?
How do children learn to speak and write?
Can these techniques be applied to teaching programming languages?
Or is learning a programming language more like learning math?
In that case, how are children introduced to math?

### "No Silver Bullet" and education for self-taught programmers

Fred Brooks makes a distinction between accidental and essential complexity.
Accidental complexity is any complexity that is not inherent to what the 
software does.
This is often complexity generated by tools.
Essential complexity is complexity inherent to the problem.
So a search engine has the essential complexity of a search algorithim and the
accidental complexity of perhaps memory management, generated by the language
in which the algorithim is implemented.

It seems like a lot of the materials for self-taught programmers actual focus on
accidental complexity.
These materials teach programmers how to use a tool, a framework or a library, or
a programming language.
The ins and outs of these tools are discussed in great detail.
So the self-taught programmer often learns a great deal of accidental complexity
without learning as much about essential complexity.
Indeed, it is the accidental complexity in which the self-taught programmer is 
fluent.
But working with essential complexity, which comes from the domain and not the 
tools, is less addressed, less familiar.
It is here where programmers stumble most.
Could a different sort of education for self-taught programmers, one which 
focused on domains rather than tools, could be one of those order-of-magnitude
productivity multipliers that Brooks talks about?
