# 13 Aug 2019

## logo-notebook and PureScript FFI

For now, should the PureScript -> 

## logo-notebook

Things I need to build:

- A text editor
  - key bindings
  - tooltips
  - syntax highlighting
  - slurp/barf
- Turtle graphics
  - WebGL
- Markdown rendering

Things I want to consider:

- Elm has good WebGL support. The WebGL code ends up being typechecked by the 
  Elm compiler.
- Elm is functional and statically typed.
- Elm does not have anything like CodeMirror, which gives the ability to create
  really nice editors.
- If I used Elm, I might end up re-implementing CodeMirror.
- Do I need to build everything in CodeMirror?
- If I use Elm, I'm not really learning anything.
- PureScript doesn't have a great WebGL library.
- I could use TypeScript instead of JavaScript.
- But if I use TypeScript, am I really learning anything either?
- What about ClojureScript? 
- I wanted to focus on statically typed pure functional languages.
  I want what I learn about to be concepts and to get better at programming. 
- I want to learn more about PureScript's type system.
- But I also want to build this editor to be snappy.
- I mean, three.js and codemirror seem like two strong arguments in favor of 
  using JavaScript.
- Do these libraries have TypeScript typings?
- Shit how am I going to keep this REPL going?
- Fuck, did I mess something up here?
- I can't really serialize the environment from JavaScript to PureScript, can I?
- I'm not really sure if I can.
- How can I do this?
- I need to start working on this shit now and see if it's possible.
- Start with JavaScript and see if it's possible?
- Hmm.
- What's the issue?
- Making the cells reactive is going to take some work.
- Because they have to share an environment.
- Maybe I can feed the interpreter something like this:

```json
[ 
  {
    "str": "(= id (lambda (x) x))"
  }, {
    "str": "(id 'foo)"
  }
]
```

and this gives me back

```json
[ 
  {
    "res": "<function>"
  }, {
    "res": "foo"
  }
]
```

But then how do I start marking cells as dependent?
Is dependence a question of order?
What if I wanted these reactive cells?
Can I still do that with the interpreter in PureScript?
Yes, I can, I don't have to serialize the environment through, do I?
Or maybe I could serialize it through as a hashmap.
If I didn't want all of the cells to update again.
Then I'd have to mark those cells that need to be re-run again.
I need to prototype this today to figure out if it will work.

## Halogen

- Halogen application is a tree of components

Components:

- pure, generally run in the Aff monad
- self-contained
- stateful
- re-render when the state changes
- state is modified by evaluating "queries"
  - the components queries is defined as a union type
  - queries read or write the current state of the component
- emit messages that notify listeners of activity within the component
  - e.g. parent listens to activity within a child component

### Defining a component

```purescript
import Prelude
import Data.Maybe (Maybe (..))
import Halogen as H
import Halogen.HTML as HH
import Halogen.HTML.Events as HE
import Halogen.HTML.Properties as HP

type State = Boolean

data Query a 
  = Toggle a
  | IsOn (Boolean -> a) 

type Input = Unit

data Message = Toggled Boolean
```
