# 08 February 2019

## Lisp

Questions:

- What's the difference between Haskell and Lisp?
  Not the technical differences but the differences in how an idea is expressed
  in both languages, e.g. implement the same function.
- What are the foundations of Lisp?
  Not just the original special forms and the eval function, but the conceptual
  foundations.
    - everything is a list
    - everything is an expression
    - recursion
    - conditional expressions
    - partial functions
- What are the foundations of Haskell?

```haskell
rember :: a -> [a] -> [a]
rember _ [] = []
rember x (y:ys) 
  | x == y = ys 
  | otherwise = (y : rember x ys)
```

In Gustons paintings, you find these vast collections of things.
The same things keep reappearing in different paintings.
He has an alphabet of symbols and he combines and recombines these symbols in 
different ways.
With a small alphabet, he creates a seemingly endless world.
And though these symbols are all different, distinct, well-defined within the 
space they occupy, easily distinguished, they at the same time all seem to be
made out of the same stuff.
That is Lisp.

## Miscellaneous

> Another trick I've found to protect myself against obsolete beliefs is to 
> focus initially on people rather than ideas. Though the nature of future 
> discoveries is hard to predict, I've found I can predict quite well what sort 
> of people will make them. Good new ideas come from earnest, energetic, 
> independent-minded people.
> &mdash; Paul Graham, ["How to Be an Expert in a Changing World"](http://www.paulgraham.com/ecw.html)

> Hilbert had no patience with mathematical lectures which filled the students 
> with facts but did not teach them how to frame a problem and solve it. He 
> often used to tell them that "a perfect formulation of a problem is already 
> half its solution."
> &mdash; Paul G

## [How to introduce custom error messages (to Megaparsec)](https://markkarpov.com/megaparsec/custom-error-messages.html) by Mark Karpov

Custom data can be added to the data returned when parsing fails.

### Megaparsec error representation**

When an error happens, you get a `ParseErrorBundle s e`.

```haskell
data ParseErrorBundle s e = ParseErrorBundle 
  -- collection of `ParseError` sorted by parse error offsets
  { bundleErrors :: NonEmpty (ParseError s e)
  -- state that is used for the line/column calculation
  , bundlePosState :: PostState s
  }
```

`ParseError` has information about the parsing error.

```haskell
data ParseError s e 
  -- TrivialError is the most common error 
  = TrivialError Int (Maybe (ErrorItem (Token s))) (Set (ErrorItem (Token s)))
  | FancyError Int (Set (ErrorFancy e))
  deriving (Typeable, Generic)
```

`FancyError` contains a set of `ErrorFancy`

```haskell
data ErrorFancy e
  = ErrorFail String
  | ErrorIndentation Ordering Pos Pos
  -- used to insert arbitrary data
  | ErrorCustom e
  deriving (Show, Read, Eq, Ord, Data, Typeable, Generic, Functor)
```

### Defining a custom error component

```haskell
data ConversionError = ConversionError String deriving (Eq, Data, Typeable, Ord, Read, Show)

instance ShowErrorComponent ConversionError where
  showErrorComponent (ConversionError msg) = "conversion error: " ++ msg

type Parser = Parsec ConversionError BL.ByteString
```
