# 12 Jul 2019

## Lisp stepper

I think I finally found a way to implement a Lisp evaluator with recursion 
schemes.

I started by using `cataM`. 
The problem is that `cataM` is a bottom-up traversal.
That means that in the expression `(quote foo)`, that `foo` is evaluated before
`(quote foo)`.
`foo` is the bottom of the expression tree and `cataM` starts at the bottom.
There's no way to know that `foo` is in the quoted context and shouldn't be 
evaluated.
So the evaluation would stop with an `UnknownVar` error when it tried to 
evaluate `foo`.

Then I switched to `topDownCataM`.
The problem with `topDownCataM` is that evaluation doesn't go far enough.
The expression `(first (quote (foo bar baz)))` would evaluate to `quote` because
only the outer expression was evaluated.
It would just take the first item in `(quote (foo bar baz))` without evaluating
that expression.
In an implementation with explicit recursion, I would evaluate `(first (quote (foo bar baz)))`
by first evaluating `(quote (foo bar baz))` and then taking the head of the 
result.
I didn't know how to do this with recursion schemes.

@sellout on the functional programming slack suggested that I use `para`.
`para` gives you a tuple of the result of evaluting the subtree and the 
unevaluated subtree.
In a quote expression, I could discard the evaluated result and just return the
unevaluated subtree.
But I still had the problem with the `UnknownVar` error.
`para`, like `cata`, is a bottom-up traversal.
So it would visit `foo` first when evaluating `(quote foo)`.
The evaluator would try to resolve a binding for `foo` and when it couldn't, 
throw an `UnknownVar` error.
That's because `paraM` traverses the result of the Algebra, which is a monad 
stack including `ExceptT`.
If I return `Left` in that stack, the traversal stops.
In this case, I want the traversal to continue.

But then I started thinking about `histo`.
`histo` doesn't short-circuit this way.
`histo` is also a bottom-up traversal.
But `histo` doesn't call `traverse` on the returned monad.
It just puts the result on the `Attr` record and moves on to the next node.
This means that I can ignore `attr.attribute` when evaluating a quote 
expression.
