# 13 Apr 2019

## GHC compiler plugins

[GHC 8.6.4: Compiler Plugins](https://downloads.haskell.org/~ghc/latest/docs/html/users_guide/extending_ghc.html#compiler-plugins)

Plugins can inspect and transform GHC intermediate language.
A plugin is effectively a function that adds a compilation pass to GHC.

### Usage

Via the command line option `-fplugin=[plugin]`.
`[plugin]` must be the name of a registered package that exports a plugin.
Passing arguments to a plugin: `-fplugin-opt=[plugin]:[args]`.

### Writing a plugin

A plugin is a module that exports a `plugin` identifier.
`plugin` must have the type `GhcPlugins.Plugin`.
There is also [`Ghc.Plugins.Plugin`](https://hackage.haskell.org/package/ghc-8.6.1/docs/Plugins.html#t:Plugin).
I'll be referring to the second module because that's what [kowainik/smuggler](https://github.com/kowainik/smuggler)
uses, and I'm taking notes on this to work on that.

1. Construct the `Plugin` type by modiying one or more of the fields on the
`Ghc.Plugins.defaultPlugin` record.

Kowainik uses the `typeCheckResultAction` hook.
This modifies the module during the type checking phase.

```haskell
typeCheckResultAction :: [CommandLineOption] -> ModSummary -> TcGblEnv -> TcM TcGblEnv
```

### Core plugin

```haskell
installCoreToDos :: [CommandLineOption] -> [CoreToDo] -> CoreM [CoreToDo]
CommandLineOption :: String
CoreToDo :: Core -> Core
```

Runs each [`CoreToDo`](https://hackage.haskell.org/package/ghc-8.6.1/docs/CoreMonad.html#t:CoreToDo)
over each module when GHC is invoked.

A simple example that does nothing but print "Hello World!" to the terminal:

```haskell
module DoNothing.Plugin (plugin) where

import GhcPlugins

plugin :: Plugins
plugin = defaultPlugin {
  instalCoreToDos = install
}

install :: [CommandLineOption] -> [CoreToDo] -> CoreM [CoreToDo]
install _ todo = do
  putMsgs "Hello World!"
  return todo
```

Types:

- [`CoreToDo`](https://hackage.haskell.org/package/ghc-8.6.1/docs/CoreMonad.html#t:CoreToDo):
  a datatype describing the various optimization passes GHC does on Core
- [`CoreDoPluginPass :: String -> CorePluginPass -> CoreToDo`](https://hackage.haskell.org/package/ghc-8.6.1/docs/CoreMonad.html#t:CorePluginPass):
  the variant of `CoreToDo` for plugins.
- [`CorePluginPass :: ModGuts -> CoreM ModGuts`](https://hackage.haskell.org/package/ghc-8.6.1/docs/CoreMonad.html#t:CorePluginPass):
  the plugin itself.
- [`CoreM`](https://hackage.haskell.org/package/ghc-8.6.1/docs/CoreMonad.html#t:CoreM):
  the monad that all optimizaitons operate in.
- [`ModGuts`](https://hackage.haskell.org/package/ghc-8.6.1/docs/HscTypes.html#t:ModGuts):
  represents the module currently being compiled by GHC.
  This is a big record with lots of information about the state of compilation.

A plugin is installed by adding a `CoreDoPluginPass` to the list of `CoreToDo`
it is called with.
`CoreDoPluginPass` contains the name of the plugin and plugin function.

### Manipulating bindings

You can change the bindings of the code by manipulating the `ModGuts` field in
`mg_binds`.

```haskell
mg_binds :: CoreProgram
type CoreProgram = [CoreBind]
type CoreBind = Bind CoreBndr
-- used for top-level bindings in a module and local bindings in let
data Bind b = NonRec b (Expr b) | Rec [(b, Expr b)]
type CoreBndr = Var
data Var
```

A plugin that prints all non-recursive bindings:

```haskell
module Foo.Plugin (plugin) where
import GhcPlugins

plugin :: Plugin
plugin = defaultPlugin {
  installCoreToDos = install
}

install :: [CommandLineOption] -> [CoreToDo] -> CoreM [CoreToDo]
install _ todo = do
  return (CoreDoPluginPass "foo" plugin : todo)

plugin :: ModGuts -> CoreM ModGuts
plugin guts = do dflags <- getDynFlags
                 bindsOnlyPass (mapM $ printBind dflags) guts
  where printBind :: DynFlags -> CoreBind -> CoreM CoreBind
        printBind dflags bindr@(NonRec b _) = do
          putMsgS $ "Non-recursive binding named " ++ showSDoc dflags (ppr b)
        printBind _ bndr = return bndr
```

### Using Annotations

A plugin retrieves annotations for the current module by going through `ModGuts`.
The data in an annotations can have any type, so long as it is an instance of
`Data` and `Typeable`.
For that reason, you must provide a type annotation.
**The user must also use this type annotation, so it is often distributed with the
plugin.**

This example prints any non-recursive binding that has the `SomeAnn` annotation:

```haskell
{-# LANGUAGE DeriveDataTypeable #-}
module Foo (plugin) where

import GhcPlugins
import Control.Monad (unless)
import Data.Data

-- the type of the annotation
data SomeAnn = SomeAnn deriving (Data)

plugin :: Plugin
plugin = defaultPlugin {
  installCoreToDos = install
  }

install :: [CommandLineOption] -> [CoreToDo] -> CoreM [CoreToDo]
install _ todo = do
  return (CoreDoPluginPass "foo" pass : todo)

pass :: ModGuts -> CoreM ModGuts
pass guts = do
  where printAnn :: DynFlags -> ModGuts -> CoreBind -> CoreM CoreBind
        printAnn dflags guts bindr@(NonRec b _) = do
          anns <- annotationsOn guts b :: CoreM [SomeAnn]
          unless (null anns) $ putMsgs $ "Annotated binding found: " ++ showSDoc dflags (ppr b)
          return bndr
        printAnn _ _ bndr = return bndr

annotationsOn :: Data a => ModGuts -> CoreBndr -> CoreM [a]
annotationsOn guts bndr = do
  anns <- getAnnotations deserializeWithData guts
  return $ lookupWithDefaultUFM anns [] (varUnique bndr)
```

### Typechecker plugins

Typechecker plugins allow the behavior of the constraint solver to be modified.
This feature is a little bit experimental.

```haskell
data TcPlugin = forall s . TcPlugin 
  { tcPluginInit :: TcPluginM s
  , tcPluginSolve :: s -> TcPluginSolver
  , tcPluginStop :: s -> TcPluginM ()
  }

type TcPluginSolver = [Ct] -> [Ct] -> [Ct] -> TcPluginM TcPluginResult

type TcPluginResult = TcPluginContradiction [Ct] | TcPluginOk [(EvTerm,Ct)] [Ct]
```

The basic idea:

1. During type checking phase, GHC calls `tcPluginInit` once before the 
constraint solving starts.
1. The plugin can do whatever it wants with `tcPluginInit`.
This could me opening new processing or preparing mutable state, whatever setup
it needs to do.
The result `s` is then passed to the next two steps.
1. During constraint solving, GHC calls `tcPluginSolve` repeatedly.
This function is called with the current set of constraints and should return
either a contradiction (type checking fails) or not.
1. GHC loops through constraint solving until it reaches a fixed point.
1. When constraint solving is finished, GHC calls `toPluginStop`. 
Generally this is useful for plugins that need to dispose of resources or do any
cleanup.

### Constraint solving with plugins

The key component of a type checker plugin is a constraint solver.


```haskell
solver :: [Ct] -> [Ct] -> [Ct] -> TcPluginM TcPluginResult
solver givens deriveds wanteds = ...
```

The function is called at two points during constraint solving:

- after simplification of given constraints
  - deriveds and wanteds are empty in this case
- after unflattening of wanted constraints


The function returns one of two things:

- `TcPluginContradiction [Ct]`
    - `[Ct]` is a list of impossible constraints that will be turned into errors
- `TcPluginOk [(EvTerm,Ct)] [Ct]`
    - `[(EvTerm,Ct)]`: the solved constraints. `EvTerm` is the evidence term for 
      the corresponding solved constraint.
    - `[Ct]`: new constraints

### Source plugins

Source plugins have access to representations of the source code.
Source plugins are often used to build development tools.

### Parsed representation

When defining a plugin with access to the syntax tree of the source code, use 
the `parsedResultAction` field of `Plugin`.

```haskell
parsed :: [CommandLineOption] -> ModSummary -> HsParsedModule -> Hsc HsParsedModule
```

- `ModSummary` contains meta-information about the compiled module
- `HsParsedModule` contains lexical and syntactical information

Manipulating `HsParsedModule` will change how the module is parsed.

### Type checked representation

A plugin that needs access to semantic information should use the 
`typeCheckResultAction` field.

Use cases for semantic information:

- check if two names reference the same definition
- check the type of a function

In these cases, you need access to the syntax tree after it has been type 
checked.
These fields give that access:

- `typeCheckResultAction`
- `renamedResultAction`

```haskell
typechecked :: [CommandLineOption] -> ModSummary -> TcGblEnv -> TcM TcGblEnv
renamed :: [CommandLineOption] -> TcGblEnv -> HsGroup GhcRn -> TcM (TcGblEnv, HsGroup GhcRn)
```

### Evaluated code

`spliceRunAction` is useful for plugins relevant to macros (TemplateHaskell 
Splices and Template Haskell Quasi-quotation).
Macros are evaluated during compile time and the macro code is replaced with 
the resulting AST fragment.
`spliceRunAction` is run before macros are evaluated.

### Interface files

`interfaceLoadAction` is run each time the code of a compiled module is loaded.
This is invoked for modules loaded from external packages or modules loaded by
GHC.
This is not invoked for the projects own modules.

### Frontend plugins

A frontend plugin is like a traditional program that uses the GHC API.
It's essentially a wrapper around GHC.
People use frontend plugins instead standalone programs so they don't have to
re-implement all of GHC's interface.

## GHC source annotations

[GHC 8.6.4: Source annotations](https://downloads.haskell.org/~ghc/latest/docs/html/users_guide/extending_ghc.html#annotation-pragmas)

An Annotation pragma attaches small bits of data to identifiers in source code.
The data persists after compilation.
This data is often useful to GHC plugins, providing guidance or additional 
information.

Example:

```haskell
{-# ANN foo (Just "Hello World!") #-}
foo = ...
```

Some of the restrictions:

- annotated binder must be at the top level
- annotated binder must be declared in the current module
- expression in the annotation must have `Data` and `Typeable` instances

**Annotating types**

Use the `type` keyword:

```haskell
{-# ANN type Foo (Just "Hello World!") #-}
type Foo = ...
```

**Annotating modules**

Use the `module` keyword:

```haskell
{-# ANN module (Just "Hello World!") #-}
module Foo where
```

## kowainik/smuggler and the GHC compiler plugin API

The Smuggler plugin uses the [`typeCheckResultAction`](https://hackage.haskell.org/package/ghc-8.6.1/docs/Plugins.html#t:Plugin) 
field (access to semantic information).

What is [`ModSummary`](https://hackage.haskell.org/package/ghc-8.6.1/docs/HscTypes.html#t:ModSummary)?

`ModSummary` is a description of a module.
A record type with a bunch of fields.
`ms_hspp_file` is one of the fields.
`ms_hspp_file` is the filename of the preprocessed source file.
Smuggler uses this locate the source file it's currently operating on.

What is [`TcGblEnv`](https://hackage.haskell.org/package/ghc-8.6.1/docs/TcRnTypes.html#t:TcGblEnv)?

Describes the top-level environment of the module at the point when the 
typechecker is finished.
This is a record type with a lot of information.

`tcg_used_gres` is a `TcGblEnv` field that is used to "record occurrences of 
imported entities".
This can be used to find unused imports.

`tcg_rn_imports` gets a list of imports if there are any: `tcg_rn_exports :: Maybe [(Located (IE GhcRn), Avails)]`.

What is [`TcM`](https://hackage.haskell.org/package/ghc-8.6.1/docs/TcRnTypes.html#t:TcM)?

`TcM` is the type-checking monad.

What is [`GlobalRdrElt`](https://hackage.haskell.org/package/ghc-8.6.1/docs/RdrName.html#t:GlobalRdrElt)?

`GlobalRdrElt` is defined in `GHC.RdrName`.
This module is focused on datatypes that represent identifier names.
`RdrName` is names that come directly from the parser.
These names have not yet been renamed by the compiler.
`GlobalRdrElt` is a `RdrName` that is globally bound.

Steps

1. figures out the path to the file
1. reads the file (and sets up a cache)
1. parses the file
1. Gets back `(Anns, ParsedSource)` from the parser
  - [`Anns`](https://hackage.haskell.org/package/ghc-exactprint-0.6/docs/Language-Haskell-GHC-ExactPrint-Types.html#t:Anns)
  - [`ParsedSource`](https://hackage.haskell.org/package/ghc-8.6.1/docs/GHC.html#t:ParsedSource)
1. Gets the user imports
1. Figures out which imports are unused
1. Figures out the positions of the unused imports
1. Removes the annotation at that location
1. Prints the ast using the new annotations
1. Writes the result to a file

Questions

- Do the annotations determine what of the AST gets printed?
- What happens if there's a weird chunk removed?
