# 10 February 2019

## Week review

3 Feb 2019 - 9 Feb 2019

|day|hour    |
|---|--------|
|Sun|02:30:00|
|Mon|00:00:00|
|Tue|00:25:00|
|Wed|00:25:00|
|Thu|00:00:00|
|Fri|00:00:00|
|Sat|03:45:00|
|=  |07:05:00|

17 tomatoes

Work done:

- Parse special forms to the SFrm type
- Add specific evaluation errors
- Debugged the special form semantics
- Added golden tests
- Created repl
- Implemented the :exit and :load repl commands
- Replaced `true` and `false` with `t` and `()`
- Pretty print parsing error
- Added source location information to the abstract syntax tree

Todo

- Helpful and readable evaluation error messages
  - Add a call stack
  - Print a stack trace
- Interactive debugging

## What is Lisp?

I have two ways of knowing a programming language.
First, I can know how to write programs in a language. 
This means knowing the syntax and the semantics.
Second, I can think in the language.
Thinking in a language is a form of practical philosophy.

When I think in a language, I adopt a way of relating to the problems I am 
solving.
This causes me to solve problems in some ways and not in others.
The syntax and semantics are secondary.
Even the language is secondary, because I can express the same solution in any
language permitting the same patterns of thought.

Take tagged union types as an example.
Several languages support tagged union types.
The syntax in Elm and OCaml is `type Foo = Bar | Baz` but Haskell uses the 
keyword `data` and Standard ML uses `datatype`.
To know how to write programs in these languages, I must know these differences
of syntax.

But thinking in terms of tagged union types is a way to know all four languages
at once.
A worldview given to me by tagged union types is that the form of my data 
should closely follow the outline of the problem I am solving.
I can bring this worldview to bear on any language that gives me this capability.
I can even apply this principle when I am using a language that does not 
acknowledge it, having observed its power and utility when I was thinking in 
terms of a language that did.

So I think that the second form of knowing, thinking in terms of a language, is 
more useful than the first.
Learning the syntax and semantics of one language does not give you any 
advantage in the next language.
It does not enhance my understanding of what I am doing, except on a superficial
level.
This knowing has an expiration date.

In this way of thinking, the language encourages me to model the variations of 
data 
This way of thinking 

Union types have a syntax and a semantics, and both can differ between languages.
But why do languages even have tagged union types?
That's where you start to discover the worldview that leads the language
designer to include them in her language.
I think of that worldview as something like "programmers should be able to create
their own types of data that model the problem their solving more exactly than
the data types built into the language".
That programmers are better off when they can make their data explicit, concrete,
and type-checkable.
The syntax and the semantics are more like implementation details of the idea.
The idea is important and interesting because it enables you to understand why
you'd use such a thing, with the motivation for using it, you can travel between

But to think in terms of tagged union types is a form of knowing that I can 
carry between these four languages without modification.
But the way of thinking given to me by tagged union types is portable.

But knowing how to write programs with these languages does not mean knowing 
how to think in the language, except perhaps implicitly.
I should be able to extend the language so that the data in my program closely
fits the problem I am solving.

But why do these languages have tagged union types?
This is where I switch to the second form of knowing the language, thinking in
that language.

The first form of knowing, knowing how  requires me to know these differences

So using tagged union types to write programs is a bit different in each language.
The first form of knowing requires me to know the differences.
Knowing how to do this 
How I use tagged union types to write programs is a bit different in each
language.



What is the worldview of the language's designer.

What counts as an idea?
I'm not sure exactly.
I don't have a precise definition.
Learning a language in terms of its ideas means that the syntax and semantics
are secondary.
They are only important to the degree that they express a worldview.

Union types have a syntax and a semantics, and both can differ between languages.
But why do languages even have tagged union types?
That's where you start to discover the worldview that leads the language
designer to include them in her language.
I think of that worldview as something like "programmers should be able to create
their own types of data that model the problem their solving more exactly than
the data types built into the language".
That programmers are better off when they can make their data explicit, concrete,
and type-checkable.
The syntax and the semantics are more like implementation details of the idea.
The idea is important and interesting because it enables you to understand why
you'd use such a thing, with the motivation for using it, you can travel between


The idea of a tagged union type is
Union types as an idea is about giving the programmer the power to
The idea of union types means that domains should be modeled as conc


Lately, I've been trying to understand Lisp.
What counts as an idea?
k

What I want to understand is the idea of Lisp, much more than I care about the
syntax or the semantics of any dialect in particular.

I recognize the idea of Lisp as an idea I encountered over a decade ago, when I
was studying art in college.
I first encountered the idea of Lisp in the paintings of Philip Guston.

Gustons paintings depict a world where everything is made out of the same stuff.

Everything still fits together because it's all made out of the same stuff.

## Ideas for Guston syntax

Better names for special forms:

```lisp
; quote
> (no-eval (x y z))
> (dont-eval (x y z))
> (as-literal x)
> (as-value (x y z))
> (data (x y z))
> (data (x y z))
> (skip (x y z))
> (skip-eval (x y z))
> (self (x y z))
> (id (x y z))
> (id (x y z))
> (same (x y z))
> (wait (x y z))
> (delay (x y z))
> (this (x y z))
> (just (x y z))
> (literally (x y z))

; stop evaluation
> (stop (x y z))
(x y z)

; sugar for stop
> '(x y z)
(x y z)

; start evaluation within a stopped expression
> (stop (x y (start (first (z)))))
(x y z)

; sugar for start
> '(x y ''(car '(z)))
(x y z)

; get the first item in a list
> (first '(x y z))
x

; get the rest of the items in a list
> (rest '(x y z))
(y z)

; place the atom 'x onto the list '(y z)
; onto or into?
> (onto 'x '(y z))
(x y z)
> (pair 'x '(y z))
(x y z)
> (into 'x '(y z))
> (together 'x '(y z))
> (collect 'x '(y z))
> (connect 'x '(y z))
> (join 'x '(y z))
> (link 'x '(y z))
> (contain 'x '(y z))
> (gather 'x '(y z))
> (hold 'x '(y z))

; is 'x an atom?
> (atom? 'x)
t

; are 'x and 'y equal?
> (equal? 'x 'y)
()

; when a equals b, return 'foo 
; otherwise return 'bar
> (when ((equal? a b) 'foo) 'bar)
y

; when a equals b, return 'foo
; when b equals c, return 'bar
; otherwise return 'baz
> (when ((equal? a b) 'foo) ((equal? b c) 'bar) 'baz)
> (if ((equal? a b) 'foo) (if ((equal? b c) 'bar) 'baz))

; when a equals b, return 'foo
; when b equals c, return 'bar
; otherwise return 'baz
> (if ((equal? a b) 'foo) ((equal? b c) 'bar) 'baz)

; and so on...
> (when ((equal? a b) 'foo) ((equal? b c) 'bar) ((equal? c d) 'baz) 'qux)

; assign the atom 'bar as to the variable foo
> (assign foo 'bar)
bar
> (alias foo 'bar)
> (label foo 'bar)
> (name foo 'bar)
> (tag foo 'bar)

; create a function that takes one argument x and returns that value
> (func (x) x)
<function>
```
