# 27 January 2019

todo

- design the language
- define the language
  - syntax
  - built-in functions
- write tests
  - parser
    - fuzz tests
  - eval
    - golden tests
  - primitives
    - golden tests
- read chapter on monad transformers
- read the original lisp paper

## Recursive Functions of Symbolic Expressions and Their Computation by Machine, Part I

Developed by the AI research group at MIT.

Lisp stands for Lis(t) Processor.

Original use case: a system for manipulating expressions.
The expressions were formalized instructions to the machine.
Through refinement, Lisp became a way to describe partial recursive functions of
symbolic expression (S-expressions).

One of Lisp's main themes is recursive definition of functions.
The language has two main components: S-expressions and S-functions.
There is a global function `apply` that interprets the language.

### Defining terms

- **partial functions**: "a function that is defined on only part of its domain"
  This is when a function does not handle every value it can get as an argument.
  Some of Lisp's most fundamental functions are partial functions, e.g. `car`.
- **propositional expressions and predicates**:
  - **propositional expression**: an expression that evaluates to `true` or
      `false`.
  - **predicate**: any function whose range is `true` or `false`.
- **conditional expressions**: these are expressions whose value depends on the
  truth value of a propositional expression.
  - the author notes that English language is preferred to mathematical notation
    for expressing conditional expressions, e.g. `if/then`.
  - conditional expressions use a propositional expression to determine an
    arbitrary value.
- **recursively defined functions**: functions defined by formulas in which the
  function itself appears.
  - conditional expressions enable recursive function definitions.
  - without a conditional expression, you could not define a recursive function
    that terminates.
  - recursive functions that don't terminate are regarded as undefined for the
    given arguments.
- **functions vs. forms**: the distinction seems to be between prefix and infix
  operators. an expression with an infix operators is called a form because it
  has no arguments. a form can be converted to an expression using a lambda.
  - `1 + 2` is a form
  - `f(x)` is a function

for example:

```
1 + 2
```

becomes

```
lambda((x, y), x + y)(1, 2)
```

- **expressions for recursive functions**:

### Recursive functions of symbolic expressions

Outline:

1. Define symbolic expressions in terms of:
  - ordered pairs
  - lists
1. Define five elementary functions and predicates
  - these elements are used to build a much bigger set of functions through the use
    of these techniques:
    - composition
    - conditional expressions
    - recursive function definition
1. Express the functions as s-expressions
1. Define a function `apply` that evaluates a function expression for its given
  arguments.

#### S-expressions

- Atomic symbols are S-expressions, e.g. `a` and `b`
- Atomic symbols are strings of letters and digits of an arbitrary length
- In the original formulation, an atomic symbol could have spaces because they
- were always delimited by the list syntax `( . )`.
- `(a . b)` is an S-expression
- `((a . b) . c)` is an S-expression
- Nested pairs can form an S-expression of arbitrary length
- `NIL` is an atomic symbol used to terminate lists, e.g. `(a . (b . NIL))`
- `(a)` is syntax sugar for `(a . NIL)`
- `(a, b, c)` is syntax sugar for `(a . (b . (c . NIL)))`
- `((a , b), c, d . e)` is syntax sugar for `((a . (b . NIL)) . (c . (d . (e . NIL))))`

#### Functions of S-expressions and the S-expressions that represent them

Elementary S-functions and predicates

The paper uses this syntax for function notation:

```
Define a function foo of x
foo[x] = T

Apply a function foo to argument 1
foo[1]

Define a function foo of x and y
bar[x;y] = T

Apply a function bar to 1 and 2
bar[1;2]
```

Five fundamental functions and predicates:

**`atom[x]`**

Returns `true` if `x` is an atom, otherwise false.

```
atom[x] = true
atom[(x . y)] = false
```

**`eq[x;y]`**

A partial function only defined if `x` and `y` are atoms.
Returns `true` if `x` and `y` are the same symbol, otherwise false.

```
eq[x,x]  = true
eq[x,y]  = true
eq[x,(y . z)] is undefined
```

**`car[x]`**

A partial function defined only if `x` is not atomic.
Returns the first atom in a pair.

```
car[(a . b)] = a
car[((a . b) . c)] = (a . b)
car[a] is undefined
```

**`cdr[x]`**

A partial function defined only if `x` is not atomic.
Returns the second item in a pair.

```
cdr[(a . b)] = b
cdr[(a . (b . c))] = (b . c)
```

**`cons[x;y]`**

Defined for any `x` and `y`.
Takes two values and returns the pair of those values.

```
cons[a;b] = (a . b)
cons[(a . b);c] = ((a . b) . c)
```

The names `car` and `cons` are related to the representation of the system in
the computer.

There is only a limited set of functions formed by composing these five
fundamental functions.

#### Recursive s-functions

The set of all computable functions can be expressed with conditional
expressions and recursive function definitions.

Examples of recursive functions

**`ff[x]`**

```
ff[((a . b) . c)] = a
```

where

```
ff[x] = [atom[x] -> x; T -> ff[car[x]]]
```

- if `x` is an atom, return the atom
- otherwise, return `ff` of the `car` of `x`

**subst[x;y;z]**

Substitute atomic symbol `x` for all occurrences of the atomic symbol `y` in the
S-expression `z`.

```
subst[x;y;z] = [
  ; if z is an atom and equal to x, then return x, otherwise z
  atom[z] -> [eq[z;y] -> x; T -> z];
  ; otherwise, process the S-expression
  T -> cons[subst[x; y; car[z]]; subst[x;y;cdr[z]]]]
```

**equal[x;y]**

This one is a little hard to write out.
I always have this problem with lisp syntax - it can be very hard to keep the
parens matched, especially when transcribing or editing code.
I don't usually have this problem with Haskell.
Haskell is _much_ more readable.

Returns `true` if x and y are the same S-expression, otherwise `false`.

**`cadr[x]`**

Alias for `car[cdr[x]]`

**`caddr[x]`**

Alias for `car[cdr[cdr[x]]]`

#### Representation of S-functions by S-expressions

where:

- `E` is a meta-expression (notation for S-functions)
- `E*` is the translation of `E` to an S-expression

M-expression to S-expression translation rules:

- if `E` is an S-expression, then `E*` is `(QUOTE, E)`
- variables and function names represented by lowercase characters are 
  uppercased, e.g. `car*` is `CAR`.
- the form `f[x1;...;xn]` is translated to `(f, x1, ..., xn)`.
  - composed functions `f[g[x;y]]` is `(f, (g, x, y))`.
- conditional expression: `[p1 -> x1; ...; pn -> xn; ]` is 
  `(COND, (p1,x1), ..., (pn, xn))`
- `λ[[x1;...;xn];E]` is `(LAMBDA, (x1, ..., xn), E*)`
- `label[x;E]` is `(LABEL, x*, E*)`

This is the basic Lisp syntax.
It was partly determined by the limited character set available on the computer.

#### The universal S-function apply

if 

- `f` is an S-expression for an S-function `f'`
- `args` is a list of arguments in the form `[x1,...,xn]`, 
  where each argument is an arbitrary S-expression

then

- `apply[f;args]` and `f'[x1;...;xn]` are defined for the same values 
  `x1, ..., xn` and are equal when defined. 

Defining `apply`

```
# quote the arguments so that eval will "regard them as standing for themselves"
apply[f;args] = eval[cons[f;appq[args]];NIL]

# appq quotes a list of values
appq[m] = [null[m] -> NIL; T -> cons[list[QUOTE;car[m]];appq[cdr[m]]]]

# eval takes two arguments:
# `e`: an expression to evaluate
# `a`: a list of pairs
# the first item in the pair is an atomic symbol
# the second item in the pair is an expression for which the symbol stands
eval[e;a] = [
  # evaluate an atomic symbol to its value
  atom[e] -> assoc[e;a];

  # if e is not atomic but car[e] is atomic, then e has one of these forms
  atom[car[e]] -> [
    # (QUOTE, e)
    # evaluate to the quoted value
    eq[car[e];QUOTE] -> cadr[e];

    # (ATOM, e1)
    # evaluate the argument e1, then call atom on the result
    eq[car[e];ATOM] -> atom[eval[cadr[e];a]];
  
    # (EQ, e1, e2)
    # evaluate the arguments e1 and e2, and call the equality operator on the
    # results.
    eq[car[e];EQ] -> [eval[cadr[e];a] = eval[caddr[e];a]];

    # (COND, (p1, e1), ..., (pn, en))
    # evaluate each predicate/expression pair in order, returning the first 
    # evaluated expression whose predicate evaluates to true.
    eq[car[e];COND] -> evcon[cdr[e];a];

    # (CAR, e)
    eq[car[e];CAR] -> car[eval[cadr[e];a]];

    # (CDR, e)
    eq[car[e];CDR] -> cdr[eval[cadr[e];a]];

    # (CONS, e1, e2)
    eq[car[e];CONS] -> cons[eval[cadr[e];a];eval[caddr[e];a]];
  ];

  # otherwise, e has the form (f, e1, ..., en) where `f` is an atomic symbol
  T ->  eval [
          cons [
            assoc [ car[e]; a ];
            evlis [ cdr[e]; a ]
          ];
          eq[]
        ];
          [; a]
        ]
]

# `((LABEL, f, E), e1, ..., en)` is evaluated by
# 1. prepend `(f, (LABEL, f, E))` to the arguments list `a`
# 2. `eval[(E, e1, ..., en); a]` where `a` is the updated arguments list
# 3. 

# `((LAMBDA, (x1, ..., xn), E), e1, ..., en)` is the application of an anonymous 
# function this works by 
# 1. zip the lists `(x1, ..., xn)` and `(e1, ..., en)`
# 2. prepend ((x1,e1), ..., (xn, en)) to the list of arguments `a`
# 3. call eval[E, a] where `a` is the new list of arguments

# substituting the variables for argument values causes problems with variable
# collision
# adding them to the front of the argument list guarantees that the correct 
# value will be bound to the variable

evcon[c;a] = [eval[caar[c]; a] -> eval[cadar[c]; a]; T -> evcon[cdr[c]; a]]

evlis[m;a] = [null[m] -> NIL; T -> cons[eval[car[m]; a]; evlis[cdr[m]; a]]]
```

I really don't understand this last clause. 
I'm not sure if the code is actually correct in the paper.
Feels like there's at least one parens mismatch.

```
  T -> eval [
        cons [
          assoc [
            car [e]; 
            a
          ]; 
          evlis [
            cdr [e]; 
            a
          ]
        ]; 
        a
      ];

  eq [caar [e]; LABEL] -> eval [
                            cons [
                              caddar [e]; 
                              cdr [e]
                            ];

  cons [
    list [cadar [e]; 
    car [e]; a]
  ];

  eq [caar [e]; LAMBDA] -> eval [
                            caddar [e];
                            append [
                              pair [
                                cadar [e]; 
                                evlis [cdr [e]; a]; 
                              ];
                              a
                            ]
                          ]
```

Questions

- Why is the definition of cdr different here than in Scheme?
  `cdr` does not return the tail of a list, it just returns the last item in a
  pair.
  If the last item is an atom, it doesn't return `(b)` but `b`.
- What is simpler, Haskell or Lisp?
- What is `evcon`? Is that a composition of `eval` and `cons`?
- What is `assoc`?
  - Answer: `assoc` takes a list of key value pairs and a key, and returns the 
    value associated with that key.
- What is the most minimal Lisp?
- Can you implement logical operators with just conditional expressions, the 
  five fundamental functions, and recursive functions? Or must these be 
  implemented as primitives?

Summary

To implement Lisp you must at least implement:

- S-expressions
  - Have two forms
    - an atomic symbol: `a`
    - a pair of atomic symbols: `(a . b)`
    - there is a syntax sugar for this `(a , b)`
    - all lists end in `NIL`
    - `(a . b)` is syntax sugar for `(a . (b . NIL))`
    - `(a, b)` is syntax sugar for `(a . (b . NIL))`
    - `(a)` is syntax sugar for `(a . NIL)`
- Conditional expressions
  - `(cond (p, e) ...)`: a function `cond` applied to an arbitrary number of 
    predicate/expression pairs
  - `cond` returns the first expression who's predicate evaluates to true
- Recursively function definitions
  - enabled by the `lambda` and `label` special forms
- Functions definitions as S-expressions
- These "special forms":
  - `atom`: returns true if the argument is an atomic symbol
  - `eq`: returns true if two arguments are the same atomic symbol
  - `car`: returns the first item in a pair
  - `cdr`: returns the second item in a pair
  - `cons`: returns a pair of two arguments
  - `lambda`: a function that creates a function:
    `(lambda (<arg-1>,...<arg-n>) <expression>)`.
  - `label`: a function that binds the value of an expression to a symbol in 
    the environment: `(label <atomic-symbol> <expression>)`. this enables 
    recursive function definitions. all functions are lambda functions. they must
    be bound to a name in order to be defined recursively.

- Can one define logical operators with the above? Or must there be other 
  primitives implemented?
  - Logical operators AND and OR are used in the definition of the meta-circular
    evaluator.

Work time: 03:00:00
