# 14 April 2019

## Thoughts

- I usually feel better about 30 minutes spent reading a book than I do about 
  30 minutes reading a blog post.
- Reading blog posts has two problems: 
  - The organization is random, determined by what appears in your feed.
  - Topics are random and not necessarily essential or fundamental information
    that I would benefit from.
- Books (especially good books) have two benefits:
  - Intentional organization of information. 
    There is a progression. 
    Concepts build on themselves.
  - Books are more likely to focucs on the essential or fundamental components 
    of a topic.
- Today I spent 1 hour reading some blog posts that I saved to Pocket this week
  and 1 hour spent reading The Little Schemer.
  - I enjoyed reading The Little Schemer much more. In the end, I felt like what
    I read in The Little Schemer was valuable information, information with a 
    long lifespan.
    None of the blog posts I read made me feel this way.
- On the other hand, browsing the internet is a way to become aware of 
  opportunities.

## ghc-exactprint

[Announcing ghc-exactprint: A New Foundation For Refactoring Tools](http://mpickering.github.io/posts/2015-07-23-ghc-exactprint.html)

### Representation

**Source positions**

Source positions are relative.
The position of each token is relative to the preceding token. 
A token at `(1, 2)` is 1 line and 2 columns away from the preceding token.

**Annotations**

Annotations are a data structure for keeping track of the relative position of
nodes in the AST.
Annotations enable the printer to exactly reproduce the source file.
This is so transformations of the AST don't change the source file in unrelated
areas.
A transformation of the AST invalidates absolute source locations but not
relative source locations.

**Refactoring**

Modifying a source file has two steps:

1. Modify the AST
1. Modify the corresponding annotations

## Blogpost preprocessor

Replace with foo.ext.

```
[> foo.ext <]
```

Replace with lines 1 to 123 of foo.ext.

```
[> foo.ext 1-123 <]
```

Replace with a diff of foo.ext and bar.ext.

```
[+ foo.ext bar.ext +]
```

Replace with lines 1 to 123 of a diff of foo.ext and bar.ext.

```
[+ foo.ext bar.ext 1-123 +]
```
