# 23 January 2019

## Reader and ReaderT

### Reader

- Functions have Functor, Applicative, and Monad instances
- fmap-ing one function over another composes those functions

The Functor instance for functions is defined like this:

```haskell
instance Functor (-> r) where
  -- compose two functions
  -- Functor f => (a -> b) -> f a -> f b
  fmap = (.)
```

The Applicative instance for functions takes two functions and a value, and 
passes the value to both functions simultaneously.
This looks like composition `(.) f g x = f (g x)` except that f gets an extra 
argument.
`f` here must have the type `a -> b -> c`.
`g` here must have the type `a -> b`.
`x` here has the the type `a`.
`f <*> g` has the type `a -> c`.
`f <*> g` is

```haskell
(a -> b -> c) -> (a -> b) -> (a -> c)
```

When a function `a -> b` is represented as `f a`, `a` is really the return type.
That's because the type constructor `->` has been partially applied to `r`.
`(->)` is `* -> * -> *`.
`(-> r)` is `* -> *`, as all Functors and Applicatives must be.
So when you write `f a` and `f` is `(-> r)`, then what you mean is `r -> a`.
This is a bit confusing.
In the context of these type class definitions, `f a` is a function that returns
type `a`.
`f (a -> b)` is a function `r -> a -> b`, a function with two arguments.
So every function is getting the `r` argument.

```haskell
instance Applicative (-> r) where
  -- Applicative f => a -> f a
  pure = const
  -- Applicative f => f (a -> b) -> f a -> f b
  -- f (b -> c) -> f b -> f c
  -- (a -> b -> c) -> (a -> b) -> (a -> c)
  -- (<*>) f g = (\x -> f x (g x))
  (<*>) f g x = f x (g x)
```

```haskell
instance Monad (-> r) where
  return = const
  -- Monad m => m a -> (a -> m b) -> m b
  -- (a -> b) -> (b -> (a -> c)) -> (a -> c)
  (>>=) ma f = (\a -> f (ma a) a)
```

`Reader` is a way to string functions together when all functions are awaiting 
one input from a shared environment.
The key intuition is "do computation in terms of an argument that hasn't been
supplied yet."
This can be useful for threading dependencies through function pipelines.

### ReaderT

```haskell
newtype ReaderT r m a = ReaderT { runReaderT :: r -> m a }
```
