# 09 Aug 2019

## PureScript Aff

An asynchronous effect monad and threading model for PureScript.

## PureScript Spec

A PureScript testing framework inspired by hspec.

**it**

`it` is the basic building block of a spec.
A test is considered passing if the Aff computation doesn't result in an error.

```purescript
it :: String -> Aff Unit -> Spec Unit
```

```purescript
it "does nothing" $ pure unit

it "adds 1 and 1" do 
  1 + 1 `shouldEqual` 2
```

**pending**

A spec can also be pending.
Pending specs are placeholders for specs that have to be written.
`pending` is a spec without a body.
`pending'` includes a spec body.

```purescript
pending "todo..."

pending' "todo: fix this broken spec body" do
  -- ...
```

**describe**

`describe` groups multiple specs in a logically related group.

```purescript
describe "MyModule" do
  it "..." do
    ...
  it "..." do
    ...
  it "..." do
    ...
```

`describe` blocks can be nested arbitrarily:

```
describe "foo" $
  describe "bar" do
    it "..." do
      ...
    it "..." do
      ...
    it "..." do
      ...
```

**Running a subset of the specs**

`itOnly`: runs only that spec and no other specs in `describe` block.

`describeOnly`: only run that `describe` block and no other sibling blocks

`focus describe ...`: can be used like `describeOnly`.

## Spago

**What is Spago?**

- A package manager
- A build tool

Replaces bower and pulp.
Uses package sets.
A package set is a set of packages that are all known to work with one another.
Only depends on the purescript compiler and git.

Alternatives:

- pulp: only a build tool (not a package manager _and_ a build tool).
- bower: package manager but does not have package sets.

## Two-pointer array iteration technique

Two reverse an array, you can use a two-pointer array iteration technique.

First, define the swap operation:

```javascript
const swap = (i,j,xs) => {
  const temp = xs[i];
  xs[i] = xs[j];
  xs[j] = temp;
};
```

Now, the question is how do you move through the array to apply this 
transformation?
The two-pointer technique works by initializing two variables:

```javascript
const reverse = (xs) => {
  const i = 0;
  const j = xs.length - 1;
 
  while (i < j) {
    swap(i,j,xs);
    i++;
    j--;
  }
};
```

So you move forward and backward until the pointers meet.

## LeetCode #350 Intersection of Two Arrays

**Question**: How do you calculate the Big O for a function with two inputs?

**Answer**: If you have to iterate one input and then iterate the second input, 
you have O(N + M) time complexity.

Time to solution: 8 minutes
Speed: beats 31.25%
Memory: beats 66.67%

```javascript
var intersect = function(nums1,nums2) {
  const intersection = [];

  for (let i = 0; i < nums1.length; i++) {
    for (let j = 0; j < nums2.length; j++) {
      if (nums1[i] === nums2[j]) {
        intersection.push(nums1[i]);
        nums2[j] = undefined;
        break;
      }
    }
  }

  return intersection;
};
```

Here is someone else's solution from:

```javascript
var intersect = function(nums1,nums2) {
  nums1 = nums1.sort((a,b) => a - b);
  nums2 = nums2.sort((a,b) => a - b);
  let res = [];
  i = 0;
  j = 0;
  while (i < nums1.length && j < nums2.length) {
    if (nums1[i] === nums2[j]) {
      res.push(nums1[i]);
      i++;
      j++;
    } else if (nums1[i] < nums2[j]) {
      i++;
    } else {
      j++;
    }
  }
  return res;
}
```

This beats 84.50% of submissions for time and 62.96% of submissions for memory.

How this works:

- Sort first. This is important because it enables you to go through both arrays
  with one loop.
- Keep two variables representing the current position of each array.
- If the elements at the current position are equal to each other, push them 
  into one into the result array.
- If the current element of the first array is less than the current element of
  the second array, because the arrays are sorted, you know you need to skip the
  through the list until that condition isn't true anymore.
- If the elements aren't equal, and the first element isn't less than the second
  element, then the second element is less than the first element. In this case,
  move the current position forward for that array.
- Do this until you reach the end of the shorter list.
- One loop to go through both arrays.

Here's another attempt from me:

```javascript
const intersect = function(nums1, nums2) {
  const counts = nums2.reduce((res, n) => {
    res[n] = res[n] ? res[n] + 1 : 1;
    return res;
  }, {});

  return nums1.reduce((res, n) => {
    if (counts[n]) {
      res.push(n);
      counts[n]--;
    }
    return res;
  }, []);
};
```

This beats 45.94% of solutions for time and 66.67% of solutions for memory.
This is exactly the same time percentile if you use `filter` instead of the 
second `reduce`.
`filter` might be better stylistically.

## LeetCode #217 Contains Duplicate

Time to solution: 8 minutes
Speed: Beats 99.16%
Memory: Beats 88.24%

Return `true` if array contains a duplicate number, `false` otherwise.

Time: O(n)
Memory: O(n)

```javascript
var containsDuplicate = function(nums) {
  const counts = new Set();

  for (let i = 0; i < nums.length; i++) {
    if (counts.has(nums[i])) {
      return true;
    }
    counts.add(nums[i]);
  }

  return false;
}
```
