# 16 Apr 2019

## The Haskell Book, Chapter 27: Nonstrictness

Basic summary of Haskell's evaluation strategy:

- Values are wrapped in a thunk
- The thunk is only evaluated when the value is needed
- The same expression is often evaluated just once, even if multiple expressions
  depend on it.

Nonstrictness means that an expression with a bottom value can be evaluated as 
long as the bottom itself is not evaluated.

In this expression, `undefined` is not evaluated.

```haskell
head $ map (+ 1) [1 2 undefined]
```

**Nonstrict versus lazy**

Lazy languages memoize function calls.
Haskell is not technically lazy because it does not memoize function calls.
Instead, Haskell is nonstrict because it doesn't evaluate expression until the 
value is needed.

**Inside-out versus outside-in evaluation**

Strict languages evaluate inside-out.
The expressions deepest in an expression tree are evaluated first.

Nonstrict languages evaluate outside-in.
The expressions at the base of the tree are evaluated first.

This is why it's possible to take the nth members of an infinite list.
A list desugars to `List a = Empty | Cons a (List a)`.
The tail of the list is always an evaluated thunk.

In strict languages, an expression is evaluated when the expression is 
constructed.
In Haskell, an expression is evaluated when the expression is used.

## Strictly evaluating Haskell expressions

`seq :: a -> b -> b` is used to force the evaluation of an expression.
When `b` is evaluated, then `a` will be evaluated too.
This doesn't mean that evaluation is exactly strict.
`a` is still not evaluated at the point it is constructed, and it won't be 
evaluated at all if `b` isn't evaluated.
But if `a` would never be evaluated, now it is.

### `seq`

```haskell
seq bottom b = bottom
seq literallyAnythingNotBottom b = b
```

Using `seq` doesn't guarantee evaluation.
In this function, `y` is never evaluated:

```haskell
wc x z = x
  where y = undefined `seq` 'y'

foldr wc 'z' ['a'..'e']
-- 'z'
```

But here, `y` is evaluated:

```haskell
wc x z = y
  where y = undefined `seq` 'y'
foldr wc 'z' ['a'..'e']
-- *** Exception: Prelude.undefined
```

`seq` forces evaluation to weak-head normal form.
Weak-head normal form only evaluates the constructor.

This does not throw an error because it only forces evaluation of the tuple:

```haskell
seq (undefined, undefined) True
```

Pattern matching also forces evaluation.

## Call-by-name, call-by-need, call-by-value

**Call by value**

Arguments to a function are evaluated before the function body.
Expressions in an assignment are evaluated before the binding is created.

**Call by name**

Arguments to a function are not evaluated before the function body is evaluated.
Assignments create bindings without evaluating the expression.

**Call by need**

This is the same as call-by-name, except that expressions are only evaluated 
once.
