# 27 Mar 2019

## [Why Make Languages](https://beautifulracket.com/stacker/why-make-languages.html)

> On a technical level, a programming language is just another program.

> ...it's fair to think of a programming language as a special kind of function.
> It probably seems weird now, but it's also fair to think of any function as a 
> domain specific language with a very tiny domain.

Before Racket, there wasn't an efficient way to create DSLs.

> ...we're going to take a broad view of a language as any structured notation
> for describing data or operations on data.

Practical benefits of creating a language:

- General-purpose languages, because they are general purpose, don't always fit
  specific problems very well. Creating a DSL for the problem enables you to 
  better express the problem/solution.
- Wide-funnel problems: large number of inputs, small number of outputs.
- Glue code that connects system pieces
- Improve an interface

Steps to creating a programming language with Racket:

- Design the notation and behavior of the language
- Write a Racket program that takes source code written in the new language and 
  converts it to a Racket program. (source-to-source compiler)
- Run the Racket program.

## [Make a language in one hour: stacker](https://beautifulracket.com/stacker/setup.html)

Essential components of a Racket lang:

- Reader: converts a string into S-expressions
- Expander: translates the S-expressions to Racket S-expressions

Loosely speaking, the reader is a parser; defines the form/syntax of the 
language.
The expander is an evaluator; defines the semantics of the language.

`#lang foo` at the top of a file tells Racket where to find the reader.
The reader points to the expander.

Racket invokes a `read-syntax` function.
`read-syntax` gets a path to the file and a port used to read data from the file.
`read-syntax` should return a syntax object that describes the module.
The content of the file is replaced with the syntax object.
Then the module calls the expander, which evaluates the syntax object.

Every source file that begins with a `#lang` line gets converted to a Racket 
module by the language reader.

Macros are:

- A syntax-rewriting mechanism
- Functions that run at compile time

Three golden rules of macros:

- Take one code fragment as input and return a second code fragment as output
- Evaluated at compile time (before normal functions)
- Cannot evaluate expressions or do anything that depends on a run time

Racket starts the expander for a language by invoking a macro called 
`#%module-begin`.
`#%module-begin` takes the expression tree from the reader and transforms to a 
representation that Racket can evaluate.

## Syntax objects

A syntax object represents source code as data.

A syntax object has more information than an s-expression.
A syntax object includes:

- source location information
- lexical context

A syntax object can have nested syntax objects instead of datum.
Arbitrary key/value pairs can be bound to a syntax object.

