# 03 February 2019

## Error and exception handling in Haskell

I want to understand the best way to handle errors in my Lisp `eval` function.
Right now, `eval` is `Sexpr -> Eval (Either EvalError Sexpr)`.
Using `Either` is very explicit.
It's easy to see how the error will ultimately be handed to the caller.
But it's not very convenient during the evaluation phase.
If I need to evaluate a sub-expression within `eval`, then I have to pattern
match on `Either`.

For example, when evaluating the cons special form:

```haskell
evalCons :: [Sexpr] -> Eval (Either EvalErr Sexpr)
evalCons [x, Lst xs] = do
  e1 <- eval x
  e2 <- eval $ Lst xs
  case (e1, e2) of
    (Right y, Right ys) -> return $ Right $ Lst [y:ys]
    _ -> return $ Left SomeError
```

This makes the code less readable.
There's a lot of plumbing.

### The Haskell Book, Chapter 30: When Things Go Wrong

> Exceptions are not explicitly part of the interfaces you're using, and that
> has immediate consequences when trying to reason about the ways in which your
> program could fail.

This is my resistance to throwing exceptions.
I can no longer rely on the type signature of the function to tell me how to
call the function.
I should call any exception emitting functions within code that can catch the
exception.
But there's nothing in the type signature to tell me that.

#### The `Exception` type class

```haskell
class (Typeable e, Show e) => Exception e where
  toException :: e -> SomeException
  fromException :: SomeException -> Maybe e
  displayException :: e -> String
```

`SomeException` is a generalized algebraic datatype (GADT).

```haskell
data SomeException where
  SomeException :: Exception e => e -> SomeException
```

What's interesting is that `SomeException` has an instance of `Exception`.
So, you need an instance of `Exception` to construct `SomeException`, which is
then its own instance of `Exception`.

`SomeException` acts like an umbrella for all these different kinds of exception
types.

##### Existential quantification versus universal quantification

This is two ways of saying the same thing:

```haskell
data SomeException where
  SomeException :: Exception e => e -> SomeException

data SomeException =
  forall e. Exception e => SomeException e
```

When type constructors are parameterized, they are "quantified universally".
Arguments must be supplied to make the type concrete.

```haskell
-- to use this type, you have to say `Maybe String`, for example
data Maybe a = Nothing | Just a
```

When you move the type parameter to the data constructor, you can't concretize
it.
Then it is "existentially quantified".
This means that any type that implements the `Exception` class can be that `e`.
But functions that consume `SomeException` can't depend on knowing the concrete
type of `e`.

```haskell
data SomeException = forall e. Exception e => SomeException e
```

Existential quantification make it possible to unify different types without a
sum type.

```haskell
data Foo = Foo deriving (Show)

data Bar = Bar deriving (Show)

data FooOrBar = foreall a. Show a => FooOrBar a

fooOrBar :: Bool -> FooOrBar
fooOrBar x =
  if x
  then FooOrBar Foo
  else FooOrBar Bar

-- so we can construct FooOrBar with totally different types of values without
-- unifying those values in a sum type like data Baz = F Foo | B Bar
```

> Existential quantification enables us to throw various exception types without
> being forced to centralize and unify them under a sum type.

### The `Typeable` type class

`Typeable` allows types to be known at runtime, enabling dynamic typechecking.

You can:

- check the type at runtime
- compare the types of two values

This type is useful when:

- multiple types are passing through the same code
- need to react to some types and not others

In general, this is a pattern to avoid but it makes sense for exception handling.

Because any exception can be thrown, and exceptions are more than one type,
you have to check the type at runtime.

`catch` relies on `Typeable`?
How does `catch` work?

1. `catch` calls `fromException`.
2. `fromException` calls `cast`.

```haskell
cast :: (Typeable a, Typeable b) => a -> Maybe b
```

This is how `catch` can match the error thrown with the error that its catching,
even when those errors are different types.

## Week review

Hours worked

27 Jan 2019 - 2 Feb 2019

|day|hour    |
|---|--------|
|Sun|03:00:00|
|Mon|00:55:00|
|Tue|00:25:00|
|Wed|00:00:00|
|Thu|00:25:00|
|Fri|00:00:00|
|Sat|03:00:00|
|=  |07:50:00|

Work done:

- Add golden tests to `maxhallinan/lisp-interpreter`
- Finish reading/implementing ["Write You A Scheme, Version 2"](https://www.wespiser.com/writings/wyas/home.html)
- Read "Recursive Functions of Symbolic Expressions and Their Computation by Machine", McCarthy
- Read "The Roots of Lisp", Graham
- Started `maxhallinan/wiz` project
- Write wiz grammar and parser
- Write unit and fuzz tests for wiz parser
- Write unit tests for wiz evaluator
- Write wiz evaluator

Todo

- Finish handling wiz evaluation errors
- Write wiz repl
- Check that all of the special form semantics are consistent with some version
  of Lisp (which one?)
- Add wiz golden tests
- Add quote syntax sugar
- Write wiz REPL
- Maybe take add a de-sugaring phase between parsing and evaluation
  - replace special form symbols with special form types
  - not sure if possible to do quote desugaring here because it might make the
    parser actually more complicated

Time goal: 12:00:00
Pomodoro method means 50 minutes working, 10 minutes breaking for every hour

|tomatoes per day |tomatoes per week | hours per week | hours per year | years to 10k (mastery) | age when I'm finished |
|-----------------|------------------|----------------|----------------|--------------|-----------------------|
|2.5              |16                | 06:40:00       | 346:40         | 28.84        | 61.34                 |
|4.5              |30                | 12:30:00       | 650:00         | 15.38        | 47.88                 |
|6.85             |48                | 20:00:00       | 1040:00        | 9.6          | 41.6                  |


### ["You and Your Research"](http://www.paulgraham.com/hamming.html) by Richard Hamming

>I don't like to say it in front of my wife, but I did sort of neglect her 
>sometimes; I needed to study. You have to neglect things if you intend to get 
>what you want done. There's no question about this.


