# 19 January 2019

## Evaluating a Scheme program

### Scheme semantics

**special form**: 

A special form is a function that is implemented directly within the evaluator.
This differs from functions that are defined as primitives or defined natively
as part of a standard library.
Evaluation of a special form often exhibits non-standard behavior, that is why
the function is implemented within the evaluator.

Scheme special forms:

- `begin` 
  - takes 1 or more s-expressions
  - the series of s-expressions should begin with 0 or more `define` statements
  - evaluates each s-expression in order
- `define`
  - evaluates a expression 
  - binds the evaluated expression to an atom
- `write`
  - stringifies a expression
- `if`
  - takes a predicate, a when-true expression, and a when-false expression
  - evaluates the predicate, then evaluates the left or right expression
- `let`
  - lexically scoped variable binding
  - takes an alternating list of atoms and expression, and a final expression
  - evaluates the expressions and binds them to the atoms
  - evaluates the final expression in this environment
- `lambda`
  - anonymous function with lexical scope

**body-expression**

`begin` takes one or more s-expressions.
This argument(s) is known as a body-expression.
The last argument to `let` is also a body expression.
Both `begin` and `let` use earlier arguments to set up the environment.
`begin` starts by evaluating 0 or more `define` expressions.
These update the global environment with variable bindings.
`let` starts by evaluating local variable/expression pairs.
These update the local environment.
The local environment is the environment that the body-expression is evaluated 
in.
The body expression is what produces the final result of calling a function.

**autoquoting**

Primitive data types like booleans, numbers, and strings don't need to be quoted
manually.
The evaluator autoquotes them.

**Working Time**: 3:00:00

- Worked through [Chapter 3](https://wespiser.com/writings/wyas/03_evaluation.html)
  of Adam Wespiser's "Write You a Scheme, Version 2"

Todo

- WYaS, Chapter 4
- Review Robert Heaton's latest blog post
- Finish WYaS
- Compile Lisp to JavaScript
- Research how Hackett is implemented
- Maybe read Beautiful Rackett
- Add a type system to Lisp
- Read SICP
